Premier of Kwa Zulu-Natal, Mr Willies Mchunu,Chairperson of the African Union Commission, Dr Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma,Minister of Arts and Culture, Mr Nathi Mthethwa,MEC for Education in KwaZulu-Natal, Mr Mthandeni Dlungwane,MEC for Agriculture in KwaZulu-Natal, Mr Themba Mthembu,Mayor of Ethekwini Metro, Cllr James Nxumalo,Adams College Development Trust Chairperson, Prof Sihawukele Ngubane,The Principal of Adams College, Mr Thulani Khumalo and all staff and learners,Ladies and gentlemen,I am honoured to be part of this important ceremony at this historic institution in Amanzimtoti, the famous and prestigious Adams College.Adams College stands out as one of the most important institutions that shaped the development of black people in the country and the region.It is one of the oldest schools for Africans in this province, and in the Southern African region.The irony is that our prestigious schools, Adams College, Inanda Seminary or Lovedale, arose out of the contradictions of the colonial project.Despite their somehow imperfect origins, these schools, like Adams College here, grew to have a very illustrious existence and lasting impact not only in the career lives of the students who passed through its corridors, but in the Southern African region.These schools pride themselves on having imparted great traditions in terms of learning, discipline and conduct. They inculcated strong values and inspired their leaners to aim to be the best in every area of service to the nation.It is not surprising that it was in these schools that many leaders from various parts of the African continent studied and went on to lead important struggles against oppression in their countries.Their lives are a living testimony to this school’s lasting impact on them, with its rousing motto; “Arise and Shine.” Adams College celebrated 160 Years of existence in 2013, with great pride given its contribution to our country and continent. This is the only school in this country that has produced two African Heads of State and Government and key leaders, the former President of Botswana, Sir Seretse Khama and former President Milton Obote of Uganda and also Mr Joshua Nkomo of Zimbabwe.It has produced four African National Congress Presidents: Dr. JL Dube, Dr. Pixley ka Isaka Seme, Mr. JT Gumede and Chief Albert Luthuli. It produced the First ANC Youth League President, Mr. Anton Lembede.Adams college also prides itself on having produced Prof ZK Matthews, the father of the Freedom Charter, the First African medical doctor, Dr. John Nembula; musical genius, Prof Khabi Mngoma, the late former Chief Justice Pius Langa and also its ambassador, the AU Commission Chairperson Dr Dlamini-Zuma.Adams college also produced the presidents of two political parties in the country, Inkosi Mangosuthu Buthelezi of the IFP and the late Zephania Mothopheng of the PAC. It also prides itself on having two Attorneys-Generals of African States as former students, Herbert Chitepo of Zimbabwe and Charles Njonjo of Kenya.We are therefore very proud of Adams College. It is one of the key institutions in the rich cultural and political heritage of our country. It stands as a powerful monument to the fact that education has always been a cornerstone of our existence as a people, even during the dark days of oppression.It also stands as a monument to what is possible to achieve against all odds.The students of Adams College succeeded at school, and many went to Fort Hare and other universities and became outstanding leaders later in life, despite studying under difficult conditions of apartheid colonialism.The revitalisation of Adams College is critical, so that it can become an inspiration to all our children who are growing up in the era of freedom and democracy.If we could inculcate in our learners the values that were imbibed by students in this college, our youth will become better leaders and citizens of our country and the region.We are therefore honoured to be witnesses of the school’s Four Phase Vision of comprehensive revitalisation, as it unfolds today.We are happy as well given the economic value of this project in the long run.Adams College will add value to the Ethekwini Municipality Tourism Project.Once completed, we expect that many tourists from within the continent would want to visit this historical site to see the school that has produced so many leaders of our continent. It fits in well with government’s promotion of our heritage sites which become very important for local economic development through cultural tourism.We therefore appeal for stronger partnerships to make all the phases of this project a success.In this regard, we thank partners like Horizon Education Trust who have already made commitment to the project, and urge many others to join.Government is also providing support, such as the Departments of Public Works and Arts and Culture as well as Ethekwini Municipality.We commend the Adams College Development Trust for their enchanting vision about this school, and their concerted efforts to raise funds and revamp it. All these efforts should inspire teachers and learners even more to hoist the name of this institution even higher in the education landscape.Education is our apex priority as a country.It is only through education that we can achieve the prosperous society we talk about.We believe in education as a powerful weapon that we can use to change our world, as said by Madiba.Our government will always be part of progressive projects of this nature.We wish the Trust and all partners all the best as this project unfolds.I thank you!Issued by: The PresidencyPretoria
Premier of Kwa Zulu-Natal, Mr Willies Mchunu,
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, Dr Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma,
Minister of Arts and Culture, Mr Nathi Mthethwa,
MEC for Education in KwaZulu-Natal, Mr Mthandeni Dlungwane,
MEC for Agriculture in KwaZulu-Natal, Mr Themba Mthembu,
Mayor of Ethekwini Metro, Cllr James Nxumalo,
Adams College Development Trust Chairperson, Prof Sihawukele Ngubane,
The Principal of Adams College, Mr Thulani Khumalo and all staff and learners,

Ladies and gentlemen,

I am honoured to be part of this important ceremony at this historic institution in Amanzimtoti, the famous and prestigious Adams College.

Adams College stands out as one of the most important institutions that shaped the development of black people in the country and the region.

It is one of the oldest schools for Africans in this province, and in the Southern African region.

The irony is that our prestigious schools, Adams College, Inanda Seminary or Lovedale, arose out of the contradictions of the colonial project.

Despite their somehow imperfect origins, these schools, like Adams College here, grew to have a very illustrious existence and lasting impact not only in the career lives of the students who passed through its corridors, but in the Southern African region.

These schools pride themselves on having imparted great traditions in terms of learning, discipline and conduct. They inculcated strong values and inspired their leaners to aim to be the best in every area of service to the nation.

It is not surprising that it was in these schools that many leaders from various parts of the African continent studied and went on to lead important struggles against oppression in their countries.

Their lives are a living testimony to this school’s lasting impact on them, with its rousing motto; “Arise and Shine.”

Adams College celebrated 160 Years of existence in 2013, with great pride given its contribution to our country and continent. This is the only school in this country that has produced two African Heads of State and Government and key leaders, the former President of Botswana, Sir Seretse Khama and former President Milton Obote of Uganda and also Mr Joshua Nkomo of Zimbabwe.

It has produced four African National Congress Presidents: Dr. JL Dube, Dr. Pixley ka Isaka Seme, Mr. JT Gumede and Chief Albert Luthuli. It produced the First ANC Youth League President, Mr. Anton Lembede.

Adams college also prides itself on having produced Prof ZK Matthews, the father of the Freedom Charter, the First African medical doctor, Dr. John Nembula; musical genius, Prof Khabi Mngoma, the late former Chief Justice Pius Langa and also its ambassador, the AU Commission Chairperson Dr Dlamini-Zuma.

Adams college also produced the presidents of two political parties in the country, Inkosi Mangosuthu Buthelezi of the IFP and the late Zephania Mothopheng of the PAC. It also prides itself on having two Attorneys-Generals of African States as former students, Herbert Chitepo of Zimbabwe and Charles Njonjo of Kenya.

We are therefore very proud of Adams College. It is one of the key institutions in the rich cultural and political heritage of our country. It stands as a powerful monument to the fact that education has always been a cornerstone of our existence as a people, even during the dark days of oppression.

It also stands as a monument to what is possible to achieve against all odds.

The students of Adams College succeeded at school, and many went to Fort Hare and other universities and became outstanding leaders later in life, despite studying under difficult conditions of apartheid colonialism.

The revitalisation of Adams College is critical, so that it can become an inspiration to all our children who are growing up in the era of freedom and democracy.

If we could inculcate in our learners the values that were imbibed by students in this college, our youth will become better leaders and citizens of our country and the region.

We are therefore honoured to be witnesses of the school’s Four Phase Vision of comprehensive revitalisation, as it unfolds today.

We are happy as well given the economic value of this project in the long run.

Adams College will add value to the Ethekwini Municipality Tourism Project.

Once completed, we expect that many tourists from within the continent would want to visit this historical site to see the school that has produced so many leaders of our continent. It fits in well with government’s promotion of our heritage sites which become very important for local economic development through cultural tourism.

We therefore appeal for stronger partnerships to make all the phases of this project a success.

In this regard, we thank partners like Horizon Education Trust who have already made commitment to the project, and urge many others to join.

Government is also providing support, such as the Departments of Public Works and Arts and Culture as well as Ethekwini Municipality.

We commend the Adams College Development Trust for their enchanting vision about this school, and their concerted efforts to raise funds and revamp it.


All these efforts should inspire teachers and learners even more to hoist the name of this institution even higher in the education landscape.

Education is our apex priority as a country.

It is only through education that we can achieve the prosperous society we talk about.

We believe in education as a powerful weapon that we can use to change our world, as said by Madiba.

Our government will always be part of progressive projects of this nature.

We wish the Trust and all partners all the best as this project unfolds.

I thank you!


Issued by: The Presidency
Pretoria