Your Excellency, Mr Peter Thompson, President-Elect of the 71st Session of the General Assembly,Your Excellency, Mr Mogens Lykketoft, President of the 70th Session of the General Assembly,Your Majesties, Your Excellencies, Distinguished Delegations,I would like to extend South Africa’s appreciation to the United Nations Secretary-General, H.E. Mr Ban Ki-moon for convening this timely High Level Meeting of the Plenary to address the large movements of refugees and migrants. This is a momentous occasion that highlights the importance of a continued global effort to address the challenges brought about by the movement of migrants and forcibly displaced persons.South Africa welcomes the adoption of the Outcome Document by Member States this morning.It is indeed our hope that significant strides will be made towards alleviating the plight of refugees and migrants everywhere and for paving the way for equitable burden-sharing among states.Allow me to recognise, however, that the movement of people across international boundaries is not a new phenomenon.Throughout history, there have been movements of people over vast distances whether they were seeking better economic opportunities elsewhere or were forced to leave their homeland due to conflict or natural disaster.We should not forget this history, nor should we forget that the forcible displacement of people has always, and continues to occur, across the globe.While we recognise that the large movements of refugees and migrants present unique challenges to affected states, South Africa also cautions Member States not to forget that the plight of forcibly displaced persons should be treated with equal concern, whether they form part of large or small movements of people.Our common humanity requires that we respect each person’s human dignity in equal measure. No instance should enjoy more attention and concern than the other.Mr President,The African Continent is not a stranger to the challenges that the movement of refugees and migrants bring.South Africa recognises that in order to adequately address the forcible displacement of people, we must address the root causes of this phenomenon.Under-development is a key driver of the displacement of people and in turn can lead to armed conflict.A concerted global effort to address the questions of under-development and armed conflict should therefore be a central focus of all Member States. Indeed, the African Union aspires under its Agenda 2063 to silence all guns by 2020.There cannot be economic prosperity and sustainable development without peace on the Continent. South Africa has dedicated itself to this crucial aspiration.In collaboration with the African Union, we have made strides in efforts to prevent and end conflicts through our involvement in high-level political mediation and conciliation efforts as well as contributing to peace-keeping and peace-making missions on the African Continent.We have also been closely involved in post-conflict reconstruction and development.South Africa has equally played an instrumental role, under the auspices of the African Union, in the establishment of the Presidential Infrastructure Champion Initiative (PICI) aimed at ensuring the acceleration of regional infrastructure development around the African Continent.Over time, sub-Saharan Africa has hosted and continues to host a vast number of forcibly displaced persons with South Africa being the largest single recipient of asylum seekers.South Africa also continues to provide shelter and support to forcibly displaced persons in line with the fundamental rights contained in our Constitution, such as the right to live wherever you like and the right to work, study and access social services.Accordingly, South Africa, as a responsible member of the international community and a caring state, is playing an active part in investing in humanity by contributing its national resources and advancing the ultimate realisation of the Agenda for Humanity that was at the heart of the World Humanitarian Summit earlier this year.Mr President,The displacement of people, whether on a large or small scale, concerns all states.We commend the global action being taken to alleviate the pressures of the movement of displaced persons everywhere.South Africa looks forward to the continued engagement on this urgent matter and we re-dedicate ourselves to continue being a partner for positive change.I thank you.Issued by: The PresidencyPretoria
Your Excellency, Mr Peter Thompson, President-Elect of the 71st Session of the General Assembly,
Your Excellency, Mr Mogens Lykketoft, President of the 70th Session of the General Assembly,
Your Majesties,
Your Excellencies,
Distinguished Delegations,

I would like to extend South Africa’s appreciation to the United Nations Secretary-General, H.E. Mr Ban Ki-moon for convening this timely High Level Meeting of the Plenary to address the large movements of refugees and migrants.

This is a momentous occasion that highlights the importance of a continued global effort to address the challenges brought about by the movement of migrants and forcibly displaced persons.

South Africa welcomes the adoption of the Outcome Document by Member States this morning.

It is indeed our hope that significant strides will be made towards alleviating the plight of refugees and migrants everywhere and for paving the way for equitable burden-sharing among states.

Allow me to recognise, however, that the movement of people across international boundaries is not a new phenomenon.

Throughout history, there have been movements of people over vast distances whether they were seeking better economic opportunities elsewhere or were forced to leave their homeland due to conflict or natural disaster.

We should not forget this history, nor should we forget that the forcible displacement of people has always, and continues to occur, across the globe.

While we recognise that the large movements of refugees and migrants present unique challenges to affected states, South Africa also cautions Member States not to forget that the plight of forcibly displaced persons should be treated with equal concern, whether they form part of large or small movements of people.

Our common humanity requires that we respect each person’s human dignity in equal measure. No instance should enjoy more attention and concern than the other.

Mr President,

The African Continent is not a stranger to the challenges that the movement of refugees and migrants bring.

South Africa recognises that in order to adequately address the forcible displacement of people, we must address the root causes of this phenomenon.

Under-development is a key driver of the displacement of people and in turn can lead to armed conflict.

A concerted global effort to address the questions of under-development and armed conflict should therefore be a central focus of all Member States.

Indeed, the African Union aspires under its Agenda 2063 to silence all guns by 2020.

There cannot be economic prosperity and sustainable development without peace on the Continent.

South Africa has dedicated itself to this crucial aspiration.

In collaboration with the African Union, we have made strides in efforts to prevent and end conflicts through our involvement in high-level political mediation and conciliation efforts as well as contributing to peace-keeping and peace-making missions on the African Continent.

We have also been closely involved in post-conflict reconstruction and development.

South Africa has equally played an instrumental role, under the auspices of the African Union, in the establishment of the Presidential Infrastructure Champion Initiative (PICI) aimed at ensuring the acceleration of regional infrastructure development around the African Continent.

Over time, sub-Saharan Africa has hosted and continues to host a vast number of forcibly displaced persons with South Africa being the largest single recipient of asylum seekers.

South Africa also continues to provide shelter and support to forcibly displaced persons in line with the fundamental rights contained in our Constitution, such as the right to live wherever you like and the right to work, study and access social services.

Accordingly, South Africa, as a responsible member of the international community and a caring state, is playing an active part in investing in humanity by contributing its national resources and advancing the ultimate realisation of the Agenda for Humanity that was at the heart of the World Humanitarian Summit earlier this year.

Mr President,

The displacement of people, whether on a large or small scale, concerns all states.

We commend the global action being taken to alleviate the pressures of the movement of displaced persons everywhere.

South Africa looks forward to the continued engagement on this urgent matter and we re-dedicate ourselves to continue being a partner for positive change.

I thank you.


Issued by: The Presidency
Pretoria