Programme Director,Secretary-General of the United Nations, Mr Ban Ki-moon, Executive Director of UNAIDS, Mr Michel SidibéPresident of International AIDS Society, Dr Chris Beyrer,AIDS 2016 Local Co-Chair, Dr Olive Shisana,Founder of the Charlize Theron Africa Outreach Project, Ms Charlize Theron,On behalf of the South African government, I wish to thank the International AIDS Society and its partners for bringing AIDS 2016 to South Africa.This is the second time that South Africa will host this global gathering, bringing together health professionals, scientists, activists, policy makers and people living with HIV in pursuit of a common cause.This forum gives us an opportunity to understand the gravity of the epidemic, while enabling us to look at innovative solutions to ensure that we achieve an AIDS-free society in our lifetime.The theme for this conference – Access Equity Rights Now – resonates strongly with provisions in our Constitution that make access to health services a basic human right. We all have a responsibility to ensure that this right is realised.As governments, we need to work with our partners to build quality health systems and provide accessible services and support.As individuals, we have the opportunity, and equally the responsibility, to make the right choices for our health and wellness.Since South Africa last hosted the International AIDS Conference, in 2000, the world has turned the tide on HIV and AIDS.Great progress has been made across the globe, particularly in regions most affected by the epidemic like eastern and southern Africa.Of the 17 million people currently on treatment worldwide, nearly 10.3 million are in this region. The latest information from UNAIDS is that the number of people on treatment in eastern and southern Africa has more than doubled since 2010. AIDS-related deaths in the region have decreased by more than a third over the same period. Mother to child transmission of HIV has been dramatically reduced.Despite these successes, the fight against HIV, AIDS and TB is not over.Too many people living with HIV do not know their status. Too many do not have access to treatment. The rate of infection remains stubbornly high, particularly among the most vulnerable populations.We know, for example, that adolescent girls and young women between the ages of 15 and 24 accounted for around 20% of new infections globally last year. In Sub-Saharan Africa this group accounted for about a quarter of new infections.This means that as we work harder to provide testing and counselling services to the general population, as we massively expand treatment to reach all those who need it, we need to significantly improve our prevention efforts.We need to ensure that adolescents and young adults – both male and female – receive information and advice, and are able to access condoms and, where necessary, pre-exposure prophylaxis.We need to design and implement programmes that address the needs of key populations that are at greatest risk of infection, including sex workers, people who inject drugs and men who have sex with men.Importantly, we need to recognise the social and economic drivers of this epidemic and implement programmes to address these.We are optimistic that the deliberations here in Durban will yield commitments from the international community to invest in research and development that could lead to new options for a vaccine and a functional cure. We must work together as the global community to achieve an AIDS-free generation, stop all new HIV infections, end the TB epidemic and encourage all our citizens to make healthy, responsible choices.It cannot be a coincidence that this conference opens on the birthday of our former President and global champion of the struggle against HIV and AIDS, Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela.His leadership and quest for human rights and equity for all people is recognised far beyond the borders of South Africa.He has left us with a profound responsibility.It is in our hands to ensure that the outcomes of the 21st International AIDS Conference advance – decisively and irreversibly – the cause to which he and so many others have dedicated so much.I cannot end my brief remarks without thanking the Secretary-General for taking time out of his very busy schedule to join us today. This illustrates his continuing support for the global fight against HIV. Under his leadership, the UN high level meetings have galvanised all member states to do more to end AIDS. I wish, on behalf of all South Africans, to thank you for your contribution to a healthy and peaceful world.In conclusion, may I wish all the delegates well in their deliberations this week.We must not fail the generations of tomorrow.I thank you.
Programme Director,
Secretary-General of the United Nations, Mr Ban Ki-moon,
Executive Director of UNAIDS, Mr Michel Sidibé
President of International AIDS Society, Dr Chris Beyrer,
AIDS 2016 Local Co-Chair, Dr Olive Shisana,
Founder of the Charlize Theron Africa Outreach Project, Ms Charlize Theron,

On behalf of the South African government, I wish to thank the International AIDS Society and its partners for bringing AIDS 2016 to South Africa.

This is the second time that South Africa will host this global gathering, bringing together health professionals, scientists, activists, policy makers and people living with HIV in pursuit of a common cause.

This forum gives us an opportunity to understand the gravity of the epidemic, while enabling us to look at innovative solutions to ensure that we achieve an AIDS-free society in our lifetime.

The theme for this conference – Access Equity Rights Now – resonates strongly with provisions in our Constitution that make access to health services a basic human right.

We all have a responsibility to ensure that this right is realised.

As governments, we need to work with our partners to build quality health systems and provide accessible services and support.

As individuals, we have the opportunity, and equally the responsibility, to make the right choices for our health and wellness.

Since South Africa last hosted the International AIDS Conference, in 2000, the world has turned the tide on HIV and AIDS.

Great progress has been made across the globe, particularly in regions most affected by the epidemic like eastern and southern Africa.

Of the 17 million people currently on treatment worldwide, nearly 10.3 million are in this region. The latest information from UNAIDS is that the number of people on treatment in eastern and southern Africa has more than doubled since 2010. AIDS-related deaths in the region have decreased by more than a third over the same period. Mother to child transmission of HIV has been dramatically reduced.

Despite these successes, the fight against HIV, AIDS and TB is not over.

Too many people living with HIV do not know their status. Too many do not have access to treatment. The rate of infection remains stubbornly high, particularly among the most vulnerable populations.

We know, for example, that adolescent girls and young women between the ages of 15 and 24 accounted for around 20% of new infections globally last year. In Sub-Saharan Africa this group accounted for about a quarter of new infections.

This means that as we work harder to provide testing and counselling services to the general population, as we massively expand treatment to reach all those who need it, we need to significantly improve our prevention efforts.

We need to ensure that adolescents and young adults – both male and female – receive information and advice, and are able to access condoms and, where necessary, pre-exposure prophylaxis.

We need to design and implement programmes that address the needs of key populations that are at greatest risk of infection, including sex workers, people who inject drugs and men who have sex with men.

Importantly, we need to recognise the social and economic drivers of this epidemic and implement programmes to address these.

We are optimistic that the deliberations here in Durban will yield commitments from the international community to invest in research and development that could lead to new options for a vaccine and a functional cure.

We must work together as the global community to achieve an AIDS-free generation, stop all new HIV infections, end the TB epidemic and encourage all our citizens to make healthy, responsible choices.

It cannot be a coincidence that this conference opens on the birthday of our former President and global champion of the struggle against HIV and AIDS, Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela.

His leadership and quest for human rights and equity for all people is recognised far beyond the borders of South Africa.

He has left us with a profound responsibility.

It is in our hands to ensure that the outcomes of the 21st International AIDS Conference advance – decisively and irreversibly – the cause to which he and so many others have dedicated so much.

I cannot end my brief remarks without thanking the Secretary-General for taking time out of his very busy schedule to join us today. This illustrates his continuing support for the global fight against HIV.

Under his leadership, the UN high level meetings have galvanised all member states to do more to end AIDS.

I wish, on behalf of all South Africans, to thank you for your contribution to a healthy and peaceful world.

In conclusion, may I wish all the delegates well in their deliberations this week.

We must not fail the generations of tomorrow.

I thank you.