Your Excellency President Franswa Hollande,Your Excellency Prime Minister Manuel Valls,Your Excellences Honourable Ministers,Ambassadors and members of the diplomatic corps,Distinguished Guests,Mr President,Let me extend our heartfelt gratitude for the invitation and also the warm French hospitality that has been accorded to my delegation and I since our arrival.The warmth and excellent arrangements are indicative of the warm relations between the two countries.Mr President,Your visit to South Africa in 2013 was a memorable occasion that further cemented the warm relations between our two countries.Today we have built on that solid foundation.The Agreements and Declarations that we have signed earlier today in the areas of education, arts and culture, agriculture, development cooperation as well as business and investment, confirm our collective determination to take our relations to a higher level.The renewed Partnership Framework Document on development cooperation for the period 2016-2019 that we also signed this morning makes provision for collaboration in the promotion of our country’s national priorities. Mr President,The importance of cooperation in the field of culture between our two countries was again demonstrated this morning with the signing of the Programme of Cooperation in the field of Arts and Culture, which is an outflow of the successful Seasons Project between South Africa and France.I met the business leaders of both countries this morning, and impressed upon them the need to further advance trade relations.France continues to be one of our biggest trading partners and investors.We welcome the presence of French companies in South Africa that provide employment opportunities and skills development to our people.We look forward to further advancing cooperation in this regard.In line with its National Development Plan, South Africa is working intensely to promote growth and to create decent sustainable jobs, to diversify its economy and ensure that its development is inclusive and leaves no one behind.We therefore welcome cooperation with France on education and skills development.We exchanged views on the outcome of the referendum in the United Kingdom to leave the European Union.We look to France playing an important role, working with other members of the EU and also the UK, to chart the way forward in a manner that will not cause further hardship in an already fragile global economy.We also had the opportunity to exchange views on the peace and security issues on the African Continent and around the world. We have discussed on-going efforts by regional organisations, the African Union and the United Nations in promoting peace and security on the Continent.Mr President,It was a very special occasion for me today when I received the digitised Rivonia Trial dictabelts, which will safeguard an invaluable part of South Africa’s history for generations to come. Mr President, tomorrow I will have the honour of presiding over the Centenary Commemoration of the Battle of Delville Wood.As I have mentioned this morning, this Commemoration is of special significance to all South Africans.We will use the occasion to redress one of the injustices of the past. In preparation for the centenary celebrations, the South African Delville Wood memorial has been transformed in order to ensure that the historical role played by black South Africans in the First and Second World Wars, is also accorded the necessary recognition as that given to white South Africans.Mr President,On behalf of the Government and the People of the Republic of South Africa, may I use this opportunity to wish you and the People of the French Republic well on the celebration of your national day on 14 July.Excellencies,Ladies and gentlemen,May I request you to rise and join me in proposing a toast to the good health and success of His Excellency President Hollande and the people of the French Republic!I thank you.Issued by: The PresidencyPretoria
Your Excellency President Franswa Hollande,
Your Excellency Prime Minister Manuel Valls,
Your Excellences Honourable Ministers,
Ambassadors and members of the diplomatic corps,
Distinguished Guests,

Mr President,

Let me extend our heartfelt gratitude for the invitation and also the warm French hospitality that has been accorded to my delegation and I since our arrival.

The warmth and excellent arrangements are indicative of the warm relations between the two countries.

Mr President,

Your visit to South Africa in 2013 was a memorable occasion that further cemented the warm relations between our two countries.

Today we have built on that solid foundation.

The Agreements and Declarations that we have signed earlier today in the areas of education, arts and culture, agriculture, development cooperation as well as business and investment, confirm our collective determination to take our relations to a higher level.

The renewed Partnership Framework Document on development cooperation for the period 2016-2019 that we also signed this morning makes provision for collaboration in the promotion of our country’s national priorities.

Mr President,

The importance of cooperation in the field of culture between our two countries was again demonstrated this morning with the signing of the Programme of Cooperation in the field of Arts and Culture, which is an outflow of the successful Seasons Project between South Africa and France.

I met the business leaders of both countries this morning, and impressed upon them the need to further advance trade relations.

France continues to be one of our biggest trading partners and investors.

We welcome the presence of French companies in South Africa that provide employment opportunities and skills development to our people.

We look forward to further advancing cooperation in this regard.

In line with its National Development Plan, South Africa is working intensely to promote growth and to create decent sustainable jobs, to diversify its economy and ensure that its development is inclusive and leaves no one behind.

We therefore welcome cooperation with France on education and skills development.

We exchanged views on the outcome of the referendum in the United Kingdom to leave the European Union.

We look to France playing an important role, working with other members of the EU and also the UK, to chart the way forward in a manner that will not cause further hardship in an already fragile global economy.

We also had the opportunity to exchange views on the peace and security issues on the African Continent and around the world.

We have discussed on-going efforts by regional organisations, the African Union and the United Nations in promoting peace and security on the Continent.

Mr President,

It was a very special occasion for me today when I received the digitised Rivonia Trial dictabelts, which will safeguard an invaluable part of South Africa’s history for generations to come.

Mr President, tomorrow I will have the honour of presiding over the Centenary Commemoration of the Battle of Delville Wood.

As I have mentioned this morning, this Commemoration is of special significance to all South Africans.

We will use the occasion to redress one of the injustices of the past. In preparation for the centenary celebrations, the South African Delville Wood memorial has been transformed in order to ensure that the historical role played by black South Africans in the First and Second World Wars, is also accorded the necessary recognition as that given to white South Africans.

Mr President,

On behalf of the Government and the People of the Republic of South Africa, may I use this opportunity to wish you and the People of the French Republic well on the celebration of your national day on 14 July.

Excellencies,
Ladies and gentlemen,

May I request you to rise and join me in proposing a toast to the good health and success of His Excellency President Hollande and the people of the French Republic!

I thank you.

Issued by: The Presidency
Pretoria