Premier Sylvia Lucas,Ministers and Deputy Ministers,MEC and Councillors,Compatriots and friends,Good day,It is a great pleasure to be here to meet you, the youth of Upington.You are the future of this region; you are the future of this country.In preparing to come here I came across the writings of one of the young people of this province.His name is Raymond Isaacs, and he grew up in the village of Dibeng.In 2015 he completed matric at Gamagara High School and is now a student at the Kathu Campus of the Northern Cape Rural TVET College.In April this year, he completed his N2 in Electrical Engineering with distinctions in engineering science, industrial electronics and mathematics.He is also promising writer who speaks about life, joy, pain, love and loss in a manner that is strikingly fresh and authentic.For our purposes today, I’d like to borrow some lines from his poem, One Step At Time. He writes:Take one step at a timeand don't settle for anything less.Search deep inside to findthe inner you that brings out the best of you.Take one step at a timeAnd not the easy way out.In the path of lifeYou will have to overcome your doubt.Failures you will have to face, But that is what life is about.And whenever an opportunity presents itselfRemember it’s just one chance so you should go all-out.Take one step at a timeDon't be hasty to get things done.Remember to live your life rightBecause you only have one.And whenever you are trapped in darknessJust look up and you'll see the sun.And by just taking one step towards your futureKnow that the battle you fight is already won... Thank you all, the youth of Upington, for declaring by your presence here today, that you are going to take one gigantic step towards your future.You have come here for knowledge, guidance and an opportunity to realise your aspirations.You are the persistent children of the sweltering Green Kalahari.You are the enduring descendants of the ever-flowing Orange River.And today, you are gazing at the Kgalagadi sun to shine on your dreams.And like the heroic generation of 1976, you are here to say that through sacrifice, hard work, education and entrepreneurship, you will move South Africa forward.Today’s Youth Development and Career Expo is about social partners working collaboratively to build better lives for the young people of this country.Investing in the development of young people is a priority for our government.Government and its social partners are in Upington to introduce some of the many opportunities that exist for South Africa’s youth.You should leave here with a better understanding of the scarce and critical skills that we need to be more competitive and efficient to grow our economy.We have a shortage of artisans.Many of these qualifications can be acquired at TVET colleges.Government is investing significantly in these colleges.We are also leading efforts to strengthen partnerships between colleges and the private sector.We are encouraging companies to offer internships and experiential learning for students at TVET colleges.Our National Youth Policy directs us to progressively introduce free education for poor learners until undergraduate level.It says we need to increase the funding options available to support students at post-secondary level who are academically successful but who are unable to complete their study programmes due to financial hardships.We will continue to mobilise the private sector, the donor community and society at large to contribute to ensuring that the doors of learning and culture are open to all.We encourage young people to seek volunteer opportunities.We encourage companies and government departments and agencies to absorb young people to develop their skills and improve their working experience.Work seekers must interact with the Department of Labour and register on the Employment Services of South Africa database.Unemployment among young people is a global trend which we must work hard to reverse.Young women constitute the majority of unemployed youth.This cannot continue.The private sector must do more to ensure gender equity in their employment.Access for young people with disabilities must also be expanded by companies, state agencies and government departments.Entrepreneurship is the heartbeat of a developing economy.Working together, we must reignite the spirit of entrepreneurship that was almost entirely extinguished by the racist policies of apartheid.Here you can gather information about how to start your own business.It is our local entrepreneurs who will ultimately create the millions of jobs that we need to grow an inclusive economy.We urge you to listen carefully and openly to the advice you are offered today.Think carefully about your passions and your talents and interests.Don’t allow yourself to be distracted from your goals.Learning does not stop when you leave school, college or university, or when you enter the workplace. Make learning a part of your life, throughout your life. Take care of yourself and care for others; respect yourself and respect others. Take responsibility in your personal relationships – as a young man or woman.So, get wise, get tested, and condomise. And remember, you can always choose to abstain.If you are HIV positive, there is support.With treatment, you will live to see your dreams come to fruition.Avoid any risky behavior, including alcohol abuse and drug abuse.Work hard, be patient and surround yourself with positive influences.Treasure the schools, universities, colleges and libraries that are meant for your benefit and the benefit of future generations.We need young people that resolve differences through dialogue, not through vandalism, violence or intimidation.Such a youth is entrusted with leading our nation to shared economic prosperity.This is a youth that will honour the memory of the youth of 1976 by voting in the forthcoming local government elections.Today is a moment for you to take yourself seriously.Today is a unique opportunity for you to take control of your future.And it is a moment for you to take seriously all the partners that are working very hard to offer you a better life than generations before you had.Information is power. And today, that power is in your hands. To achieve your goals, learn from the legendary Muhammad Ali, whose recent passing has been mourned across the globe. He said:I hated every minute of training, but I said, ‘Don’t quit. Suffer now and live the rest of your life as a champion.’ You all have it in you to be the champions who will make South Africa prosperous.Be a voice of hope and a catalyst for change.South Africa needs you, because you move South Africa forward.I thank you.
Premier Sylvia Lucas,
Ministers and Deputy Ministers,
MEC and Councillors,
Compatriots and friends,

Good day,

It is a great pleasure to be here to meet you, the youth of Upington.

You are the future of this region; you are the future of this country.

In preparing to come here I came across the writings of one of the young people of this province.

His name is Raymond Isaacs, and he grew up in the village of Dibeng.

In 2015 he completed matric at Gamagara High School and is now a student at the Kathu Campus of the Northern Cape Rural TVET College.

In April this year, he completed his N2 in Electrical Engineering with distinctions in engineering science, industrial electronics and mathematics.

He is also promising writer who speaks about life, joy, pain, love and loss in a manner that is strikingly fresh and authentic.

For our purposes today, I’d like to borrow some lines from his poem, One Step At Time. He writes:

Take one step at a time
and don't settle for anything less.
Search deep inside to find
the inner you that brings out the best of you.

Take one step at a time
And not the easy way out.
In the path of life
You will have to overcome your doubt.

Failures you will have to face,
But that is what life is about.
And whenever an opportunity presents itself
Remember it’s just one chance so you should go all-out.

Take one step at a time
Don't be hasty to get things done.
Remember to live your life right
Because you only have one.
And whenever you are trapped in darkness
Just look up and you'll see the sun.
And by just taking one step towards your future
Know that the battle you fight is already won...

Thank you all, the youth of Upington, for declaring by your presence here today, that you are going to take one gigantic step towards your future.

You have come here for knowledge, guidance and an opportunity to realise your aspirations.

You are the persistent children of the sweltering Green Kalahari.

You are the enduring descendants of the ever-flowing Orange River.

And today, you are gazing at the Kgalagadi sun to shine on your dreams.

And like the heroic generation of 1976, you are here to say that through sacrifice, hard work, education and entrepreneurship, you will move South Africa forward.

Today’s Youth Development and Career Expo is about social partners working collaboratively to build better lives for the young people of this country.

Investing in the development of young people is a priority for our government.

Government and its social partners are in Upington to introduce some of the many opportunities that exist for South Africa’s youth.

You should leave here with a better understanding of the scarce and critical skills that we need to be more competitive and efficient to grow our economy.

We have a shortage of artisans.

Many of these qualifications can be acquired at TVET colleges.

Government is investing significantly in these colleges.

We are also leading efforts to strengthen partnerships between colleges and the private sector.

We are encouraging companies to offer internships and experiential learning for students at TVET colleges.

Our National Youth Policy directs us to progressively introduce free education for poor learners until undergraduate level.

It says we need to increase the funding options available to support students at post-secondary level who are academically successful but who are unable to complete their study programmes due to financial hardships.

We will continue to mobilise the private sector, the donor community and society at large to contribute to ensuring that the doors of learning and culture are open to all.

We encourage young people to seek volunteer opportunities.

We encourage companies and government departments and agencies to absorb young people to develop their skills and improve their working experience.

Work seekers must interact with the Department of Labour and register on the Employment Services of South Africa database.

Unemployment among young people is a global trend which we must work hard to reverse.

Young women constitute the majority of unemployed youth.

This cannot continue.

The private sector must do more to ensure gender equity in their employment.

Access for young people with disabilities must also be expanded by companies, state agencies and government departments.

Entrepreneurship is the heartbeat of a developing economy.

Working together, we must reignite the spirit of entrepreneurship that was almost entirely extinguished by the racist policies of apartheid.

Here you can gather information about how to start your own business.

It is our local entrepreneurs who will ultimately create the millions of jobs that we need to grow an inclusive economy.

We urge you to listen carefully and openly to the advice you are offered today.

Think carefully about your passions and your talents and interests.

Don’t allow yourself to be distracted from your goals.

Learning does not stop when you leave school, college or university, or when you enter the workplace.

Make learning a part of your life, throughout your life.

Take care of yourself and care for others; respect yourself and respect others.

Take responsibility in your personal relationships – as a young man or woman.

So, get wise, get tested, and condomise. And remember, you can always choose to abstain.

If you are HIV positive, there is support.

With treatment, you will live to see your dreams come to fruition.

Avoid any risky behavior, including alcohol abuse and drug abuse.

Work hard, be patient and surround yourself with positive influences.

Treasure the schools, universities, colleges and libraries that are meant for your benefit and the benefit of future generations.

We need young people that resolve differences through dialogue, not through vandalism, violence or intimidation.

Such a youth is entrusted with leading our nation to shared economic prosperity.

This is a youth that will honour the memory of the youth of 1976 by voting in the forthcoming local government elections.

Today is a moment for you to take yourself seriously.

Today is a unique opportunity for you to take control of your future.

And it is a moment for you to take seriously all the partners that are working very hard to offer you a better life than generations before you had.

Information is power. And today, that power is in your hands.

To achieve your goals, learn from the legendary Muhammad Ali, whose recent passing has been mourned across the globe. He said:

I hated every minute of training, but I said, ‘Don’t quit. Suffer now and live the rest of your life as a champion.’

You all have it in you to be the champions who will make South Africa prosperous.

Be a voice of hope and a catalyst for change.

South Africa needs you, because you move South Africa forward.

I thank you.