Comrade Chairperson of the SPLM and President of the Republic of South Sudan-Salva Kiir Mayardit;Comrade Vice President Dr WaniIgga;Acting Secretary-General of the SPLM Jemma Nunu Kumba;Comrade Members of the Politburo;Comrade Members of the National Liberation Council;Comrade Members of the Tripartite Committee;Distinguished delegates and invited guests;Comrades, Friends and colleagues;We take this opportunity to thank the leadership of the SPLM for extending an invitation to the leader of our movement, the African National Congress, and President of the Republic of South Africa, Comrade Jacob Zuma to participate in this historic gathering.In this regard, we wish to convey the best wishes of President Jacob Zuma and indeed the entire leadership and membership of the ANC for the successful deliberations of this Extra-ordinary Convention of the SPLM.As Comrade Chairperson and indeed the entire leadership of the SPLM is aware, this year marks the 104th anniversary of the birth of the ANC which was formed on 08 January 1912.As we speak the leadership and broad membership of the ANC are hard at work preparing for these celebrations which are scheduled to take place on Saturday, 9 January 2016.Accordingly, Comrade Chairperson and the entire leadership of SPLM please accepts fraternal greetings from the President Jacob Zuma, the National Executive Committee of the ANC and most certainly those of all its strategic alliance partners to the leadership and membership of the SPLM.We extend greetings to the SPLM leadership and membership because our 104 years old liberation movement, the ANC has historically shared trenches of struggle with the SPLM in pursuit of the political and economic emancipation of our two peoples.Today, our two peoples live in conditions of freedom. Inspired by a deep sense of Pan Africanism, we continue to strive for the political and economic renewal of our continent to create a better life for all its peoples.We continue to strive for the creation of a new society in which freedom, democracy, peace and justice and economic emancipation shall be the defining feature of our peoples lives.Comrade Chairperson, leaders of the SPLM and delegatesThe convening of this Extra-Ordinary Convention of the SPLM takes place within the context of the adoption of the Arusha Agreement signed on 21January 2015 and the return of several leaders of the SPLM to Juba in 2015 and the convening of this Extra Ordinary Convention in this very beautiful capital of South Sudan, Juba.These momentous and defining events have given impetus to efforts aimed at the consolidation of peace and the unification of SPLM.This is a vision contained in the Arusha Agreement and signed by leaders of SPLM. It is a vision shared by leaders and peoples of Tanzania, Kenya, Ethiopia, Uganda, South Africa and the entire continent.I can say without fear of contradiction that it is a vision shared by millions of ordinary people of South Sudan.We owe it to these ordinary people of South Sudan to ensure that this Convention adds rather than subtract from efforts directed at the unification of this revolutionary movement of the people of South Sudan.These ordinary people of South Sudan expect nothing else from their leaders than to emerge from this Extra-Ordinary Convention with a clear programme of unifying the ranks of their revolutionary movement, the SPLM.They expect this Extra-ordinary Convention to emerge with a clear and unequivocal message that the unity of the SPLM is sacrosanct and paramount, and that in the end the unity of the SPLM is indeed non-negotiable.They expect this not out of any sense of entitlement but because the SPLM belongs to the people of South Sudan and is the authentic, credible and trusted repository of the hopes of the people of South Sudan.Indeed it is these very ordinary people of South Sudan who have borne the brunt of the war that raged in this country for years.The ordinary men and women and indeed the youth of your beautiful country know that their confidence in the SPLM is not misplaced even as they have faced hardships and difficulties.They are aware of the efforts of the African continent to help resolve the challenges facing this young nation.They are conscious of efforts of the international community to bring an end the conflict in South Sudan.The people of South Sudan are indeed entitled to peace, security and development.Comrade Chairperson and distinguished delegates.We wish to assure the leadership of the SPLM in all its formations and the broad membership of the SPLM that as you go through deliberations of this Extra-Ordinary Convention, you can draw inspiration from the knowledge that Africa stands steadfastly behind you.The ANC, which we represent here today, remains committed to support you to realise the unity of this glorious movement and create conditions for peace and sustainable development in South Sudan.We recognise that none but yourselves can reach out to each other to advance the cause of peace among the various strands of the SPLM. Only yourselves as custodians of this movement can bring an end to the suffering of the people of South Sudan.It is only the SPLM that continues to carry the hopes and aspirations of the people of South Sudan.History requires that you subordinate all other interests to the broader interests of the nation of South Sudan.Lasting peace is within reach! It is in your hands that you can bring an end to the strife and conflict in South Sudan and replace it with peace, co-operation and development.We are confident that within the SPLM resides men and women who have the capacity and the political will to rise to the occasion in the service of their people.Once more Comrade Chairperson,Distinguished guests,Comrades and friends,Ladies and gentlemenPlease remain assured of our wish for the success of the deliberations of this Extra-Ordinary Convention of the SPLM. We are hopeful that you will emerge from this Convention with a higher commitment in the best interests not only of members and supporters of the SPLM but in the broader interests of the nation.As you traverse this difficult path, you shall not find us wanting but shall walk with you every step of the way towards the unity of the SPLM and the end to conflict and strife in South Sudan. I thank you
Comrade Chairperson of the SPLM and President of the Republic of South Sudan-Salva Kiir Mayardit;
Comrade Vice President Dr WaniIgga;
Acting Secretary-General of the SPLM Jemma Nunu Kumba;
Comrade Members of the Politburo;
Comrade Members of the National Liberation Council;
Comrade Members of the Tripartite Committee;
Distinguished delegates and invited guests;
Comrades, Friends and colleagues;

We take this opportunity to thank the leadership of the SPLM for extending an invitation to the leader of our movement, the African National Congress, and President of the Republic of South Africa, Comrade Jacob Zuma to participate in this historic gathering.

In this regard, we wish to convey the best wishes of President Jacob Zuma and indeed the entire leadership and membership of the ANC for the successful deliberations of this Extra-ordinary Convention of the SPLM.

As Comrade Chairperson and indeed the entire leadership of the SPLM is aware, this year marks the 104th anniversary of the birth of the ANC which was formed on 08 January 1912.

As we speak the leadership and broad membership of the ANC are hard at work preparing for these celebrations which are scheduled to take place on Saturday, 9 January 2016.

Accordingly, Comrade Chairperson and the entire leadership of SPLM please accepts fraternal greetings from the President Jacob Zuma, the National Executive Committee of the ANC and most certainly those of all its strategic alliance partners to the leadership and membership of the SPLM.

We extend greetings to the SPLM leadership and membership because our 104 years old liberation movement, the ANC has historically shared trenches of struggle with the SPLM in pursuit of the political and economic emancipation of our two peoples.

Today, our two peoples live in conditions of freedom. Inspired by a deep sense of Pan Africanism, we continue to strive for the political and economic renewal of our continent to create a better life for all its peoples.

We continue to strive for the creation of a new society in which freedom, democracy, peace and justice and economic emancipation shall be the defining feature of our peoples lives.

Comrade Chairperson, leaders of the SPLM and delegates

The convening of this Extra-Ordinary Convention of the SPLM takes place within the context of the adoption of the Arusha Agreement signed on 21January 2015 and the return of several leaders of the SPLM to Juba in 2015 and the convening of this Extra Ordinary Convention in this very beautiful capital of South Sudan, Juba.

These momentous and defining events have given impetus to efforts aimed at the consolidation of peace and the unification of SPLM.

This is a vision contained in the Arusha Agreement and signed by leaders of SPLM. It is a vision shared by leaders and peoples of Tanzania, Kenya, Ethiopia, Uganda, South Africa and the entire continent.

I can say without fear of contradiction that it is a vision shared by millions of ordinary people of South Sudan.

We owe it to these ordinary people of South Sudan to ensure that this Convention adds rather than subtract from efforts directed at the unification of this revolutionary movement of the people of South Sudan.

These ordinary people of South Sudan expect nothing else from their leaders than to emerge from this Extra-Ordinary Convention with a clear programme of unifying the ranks of their revolutionary movement, the SPLM.

They expect this Extra-ordinary Convention to emerge with a clear and unequivocal message that the unity of the SPLM is sacrosanct and paramount, and that in the end the unity of the SPLM is indeed non-negotiable.

They expect this not out of any sense of entitlement but because the SPLM belongs to the people of South Sudan and is the authentic, credible and trusted repository of the hopes of the people of South Sudan.

Indeed it is these very ordinary people of South Sudan who have borne the brunt of the war that raged in this country for years.

The ordinary men and women and indeed the youth of your beautiful country know that their confidence in the SPLM is not misplaced even as they have faced hardships and difficulties.

They are aware of the efforts of the African continent to help resolve the challenges facing this young nation.

They are conscious of efforts of the international community to bring an end the conflict in South Sudan.

The people of South Sudan are indeed entitled to peace, security and development.

Comrade Chairperson and distinguished delegates.

We wish to assure the leadership of the SPLM in all its formations and the broad membership of the SPLM that as you go through deliberations of this Extra-Ordinary Convention, you can draw inspiration from the knowledge that Africa stands steadfastly behind you.

The ANC, which we represent here today, remains committed to support you to realise the unity of this glorious movement and create conditions for peace and sustainable development in South Sudan.

We recognise that none but yourselves can reach out to each other to advance the cause of peace among the various strands of the SPLM. Only yourselves as custodians of this movement can bring an end to the suffering of the people of South Sudan.

It is only the SPLM that continues to carry the hopes and aspirations of the people of South Sudan.

History requires that you subordinate all other interests to the broader interests of the nation of South Sudan.

Lasting peace is within reach! It is in your hands that you can bring an end to the strife and conflict in South Sudan and replace it with peace, co-operation and development.

We are confident that within the SPLM resides men and women who have the capacity and the political will to rise to the occasion in the service of their people.

Once more Comrade Chairperson,
Distinguished guests,
Comrades and friends,
Ladies and gentlemen

Please remain assured of our wish for the success of the deliberations of this Extra-Ordinary Convention of the SPLM.

We are hopeful that you will emerge from this Convention with a higher commitment in the best interests not only of members and supporters of the SPLM but in the broader interests of the nation.

As you traverse this difficult path, you shall not find us wanting but shall walk with you every step of the way towards the unity of the SPLM and the end to conflict and strife in South Sudan.

I thank you
