The Chairperson of the National House of Traditional Leaders, Kgosi Maubane (Kgabo!),The Deputy Chairperson, Inkosi Sipho Mahlangu,The Minister for Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs, Mr Des Van Rooyen,Ministers and Premiers,Deputy Ministers present,MECs,Members of Parliament,Chairpersons and Deputies of the Provincial Houses,Members of the National and Provincial Houses of Traditional Leaders and all Members,Chairperson of the National Khoi-San Council (NKC) and your Councillors,Chairperson and members of the National Interfaith Council of South Africa (NICSA),President of CONTRALESA, Kgoshi Thobejane and your Executive Committee,All traditional and Khoisan leaders present here,Esteemed traditional leaders from the SADC region,Ladies and gentlemen, I greet you all on this important day on our calendar, the annual official opening of the National House of Traditional Leaders.The institution, status and role of traditional leadership are recognised in Chapter 12 of the Constitution of the Republic. Traditional leaders have an important place in the lives of many of our communities which is why we have the National House of Traditional Leaders and provincial houses in our country’s democratic system of governance. As you are aware the importance of traditional leaders does not start now. They played a key role in fighting colonialism and apartheid. Traditional leaders were present in the establishment of the ANC as the liberation movement that was to fight for decades to liberate South Africa and her people from subjugation and institutionalised racism. It is for this reason therefore, that the crafters of the constitution in their wisdom, saw it necessary to ensure the recognition of traditional leadership in the Constitution of the republic. Compatriots and esteemed leaders of our people, As we mark 22 years of freedom this year, we confirm that as South Africa we are united against racism. We were reminded sharply early this year that there is still a need to continue the fight against racism and prejudice and to ensure that respect for all regardless of their race, colour or creed is entrenched amongst all our people. It is for this reason that we have declared March 2016 the month in which we spread the message that we are united against racism in our country. We urge traditional leaders to join the campaign against racism in their areas, including participation in the national day against racism on 21 March 2016, Human Rights Day in Durban, KwaZulu-Natal. Let all South Africans speak in on voice on March 21 and every other day, and say we are united against racism and that together we will continue to build a united, non-racial, non-sexist, democratic and prosperous South Africa. Esteemed leaders of our people, This Official Opening takes place a few weeks after the State of the Nation Address (SONA) and just after the Budget speech by the Minister of Finance. We noted in both speeches that our economy faces difficulties due to the slow growth in the global economy as well as some domestic constraints. It is important that we join hands as all sectors to promote inclusive economic growth and job creation, and to improve the business environment, despite the negative global economic climate. We have spent the past few weeks working with the business community to support our economy through various measures. This includes changing the way we work as government. It requires that we cut down on wastage and ensure that money is spent on the core business of government, which is delivering services to our people. We will also be working hard as government to remove the obstacles to investment. Our people need jobs. And it is important for us to do everything we can to create the right environment for job creation. I established an Inter-Ministerial Committee on Investment Promotion and it will meet for the first time tomorrow. I asked the business community for the first time to send a contribution to the meeting in the form of a submission on what exists in the regulatory environment that makes it difficult for them to do business with ease and help in growing the economy. They have sent me a comprehensive contribution that I will discuss with Ministers tomorrow. In this regard, we are really working together to boost economic growth and job creation. It is not the business of government per se to create jobs. We must create the right environment for business to thrive, so that they can create jobs for our people. On the 15th of March I will convene the Labour Working Group with the economy being a key agenda item as well. We know that when people have jobs, traditional leaders will be happy as it means a better life for your people. I announced some of the steps our government, working together with other partners in business, organised labour, and civil society generally, is taking to ignite economic growth and create jobs for millions of people who are unemployed. The National Development Plan remains our strategy for creating a South Africa with high levels of economic growth, employment and shared prosperity for all. We have developed the Medium Term Strategic Framework, which is a five year programme for the implementation of the NDP. In addition to the NDP, I announced a Nine Point Plan for turning around the economy. We have been vigorously implementing the Nine Point Plan and the result of this work has been increased investment in various sectors of the economy. These investments contribute to economic growth and create jobs for our people. Chairperson, In the SONA I provided feedback on some agricultural projects. I am happy to inform this House as well that the Department of Rural Development and Land Reform is finalising business plans for all the 44 districts in the country where agricultural parks known as Agri-Parks will be established after consultation with stakeholders. As an important stakeholder, we believe that the National House and the institution of traditional leadership must lead in the implementation of these plans. One of the strategic objectives of the parks is to:“bring under-utilised land (especially in Communal Areas) into full production within three years and expand irrigated agriculture”. Again the Agricultural Parks programme has as one of its guiding principles “Maximising access to market to all farmers with a bias to emerging farmers and rural areas”. This is a very important programme and we urge our traditional leaders to assist in ensuring its success. Chairperson, Let me also inform you that Government has developed an Agricultural Policy Action Plan under which food security at household level should be achieved through the utilisation of productive one million hectares of the communal land for food production. The Fetsa Tlala/Xoshindlala Food Security Programme, through which communities are assisted to produce their own food, is part of this Policy Action Plan. I have been informed that traditional leaders continue to participate in this important programme. Ngale Fetsa-Tlala noma uxoshindlala, abantu banikwa imbewu, amageja, ogandaganda nokunye ukuze balime bakhiqize ukudla kwasekhaya kanye nokokudayisa. Sigqugquzela ukuba zonke izindawo zamakhosi zibe nawo lomkhankaso kaFetsa Tlala/Xoshindlala. Akusetshenzwe, silime abantu bangabulawa indlala.Chairperson,We have noted that some of the productive communal land under traditional councils remains inadequately utilised. I urge traditional leaders to encourage communities to plough and till the productive land so that they can produce healthy food for their families and reduce the levels of food insecurity and poverty that are so prevalent. Esteemed leaders of our people, One of the domestic constraints to growth in our country currently is the severe drought. It threatens the livelihoods of our people and has pushed most of the farmers to the edge of financial ruin. Five provinces have declared a state of provincial drought disaster, namely KwaZulu-Natal, North West, Free State, Limpopo and Mpumalanga.The situation is very difficult for many farmers. They have seen their livestock die which has cost a lot of money. Food prices will go up because of the drought. You know this very well as many of these farms are in your areas. Government has created a drought relief package focusing on the following: • identification of land for the relocation of livestock, • revitalisation of feedlots,• drilling and equipment of boreholes,• auction sales of livestock,• firebreaks creation, and• provision of feed and water for livestock. A number of government departments are assisting in alleviating the effects of the drought. The Primary Focus currently is on Funding for Emergency or immediate Needs. Interventions are sent to areas where existing water infrastructure is not functional due to drought and where there are no alternative means for water supply. Government is also assisting where water sources have dried up due to drought and communities do not have any alternative means for water supply. In addition to this, the Department of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries has reprioritised funds to provide livestock feed and water to affected farmers. The Department of Rural Development and Land Reform has reprioritised funds for livestock feed, livestock water, firebreaks, feedlots and auction sales. The Department of Water and Sanitation has reprioritised funds for the provision of water for human consumption. In addition to this, the Department of Cooperative Governance, through the National Disaster Management Centre, will augment funding from the Disaster Grants in case of that resources made available locally and provincially are exhausted. There are shortfalls and there is still a need for assistance on the ground. It is a difficult period for farmers and communities alike. But working together, we will overcome this hardship. We always overcome our challenges because we work together as South Africans when faced with difficulties. Chairperson,During the debate of my address to this august House last year, we spent a lot of time discussing the negative impact that land dispossession has had on the lives of black people in South Africa. The dispossession of our land is the source of the poverty and inequality which have become the ugly hallmark of our nation and an impediment to a future of shared prosperity. In my address last year I urged traditional leaders to join their efforts in claiming land on behalf of the communities they lead that was taken away rather than lodging competing claims. I have been informed that some work in this regard has started, championed by the National House of Traditional Leaders. I strongly believe that access to land and security of land tenure are key to development, especially agricultural development. Land reform lies at the centre of government’s efforts to bring about inclusive economic development. It is at the centre of the NDP. I urge traditional leaders to thoughtfully and actively engage with the matter of land reform on behalf of the communities they lead. I am raising this as we can talk about agriculture and food security but without access to land, our people cannot plough and feed themselves or contribute to economic growth. Chairperson, This year we mark several anniversaries which indicate the journey we have travelled on the road to freedom and democracy. These include the 40th anniversary of the 16 June 1976 student uprising, the 60th anniversary of the Women’s March to the Union Buildings, and the 20th anniversary of the signing of the Constitution of the Republic by former President Nelson Mandela. The year 2016 is also the centenary of the University of Fort Hare. Government will organise several events to mark these important milestones. These milestones remind us of where we come from and the journey we have travelled.To further cement our history and ensure that it is preserved, we are continuing with establishment a new heritage landscape for the country.We have identified a number of activities in this regard. This includes identifying historic sites, individuals and organisations that have made outstanding contributions to our liberation struggle and history and to the development of our cultural values. The identified sites are being upgraded and declared National Heritage sites and will be maintained by the State. The task of grading and declaring these places is by the South African Heritage Resource Agency (SAHRA). Through the upgrading and declaration of these historic sites, we will ensure a more representative and inclusive South African history and heritage. More importantly , this will also contribute towards shared values and a common national identity in the country. Furthermore, the building and maintenance of new monuments and historic sites has a greater potential to stimulate economic activity and create much needed jobs in communities where these sites are located. These sites will also contribute towards cultural tourism both domestic and international. I will mention just a few of the sites. The Department of Arts and Culture, in partnership with the National Heritage Monument Company, is conceptualising a National Heritage Monument which will include 400 life-size statues of heroes and heroines to be stationed at Fountains Valley in Tshwane. Fifty nine of the four hundred statues have been completed from 2012 and were launched at Groenkloof Nature Reserve on 15 September 2015.The renovations of the homestead of President OR Tambo and the upgrading of the Khananda heritage site started in 2012 as the first phase is complete. The Garden of Remembrance as well as the Interpretative Centre, which are second phase components as part of the OR Tambo Heritage Route in Mbizana, Eastern Cape, are in the construction phase. The John Langalibalele Dube gravesite upgrade and memorial in Durban was unveiled as phase one, honouring the founding President of the African National Congress. Phase two priority elements including an Amphitheatre, Access Driveway and Parking for the J L Dube Project are in the construction phase scheduled for completion this year. This project is part of the Inanda Heritage Route which comprises sites associated with a number of prominent sites, people and events. The Inquza Hill Museum, which provides the narrative of the historic and courageous Pondo Revolt of 1960 is under construction. The Bhambatha statue in Greytown is completed, honouring the hero of the poll tax revolt in 1906. The Wesleyan Church in Waaihoek where the African National Congress (ANC) was founded has been renovated and the exhibition, content and design has been presented to stakeholders for approval before installation. Government is going to honour one of the great heroes of the struggle for liberation, the late president of the United Democratic Front, Mr Archie Gumede, through the erection of a statue. This courageous freedom fighter deserves such an honour. Our youth and future generations must know and understand the story of our struggle for liberation, through visiting sites such as where this statue will be situated. We will also be building monuments to mark painful periods in our history. The Matola Monument and Interpretive Centre is completed and was unveiled by the two heads of state of the Republic of South Africa and Mozambique on 11 September 2015, honouring the freedom fighters who lost their lives in the hands of the brutal apartheid defence force when it raided Mozambique in 1981.The notorious farm Vlakpaas, where freedom fighters were brutally tortured and murdered by the apartheid regime, will be developed into a heritage site. Compatriots and esteemed leaders of our people, It is often difficult to appreciate the progress that has been made when a country is facing a difficult economic environment such as the one we are currently facing. Just over two decades ago the prospect of a democratic South Africa where all its citizens live in peace and freedom looked like a pipedream. Working together we pulled our land back from the brink of a civil war. We are building a South Africa today where all of our people will live together in peace and friendship. I am convinced that working together again we can overcome the economic headwinds we face. Let us therefore work together to promote our country and market its many positive attributes amongst its people. Sadly there are those who want our people to believe that they have not achieved anything since 1994. That is not true. South Africans have consolidated democracy and have begun to build a better life for all especially the poor through many programmes of government since 1994. Our country is a success story. We need to recognise that, while working hard to fix the problems that exist, which exist in all developing countries. Chairperson, We thank traditional leaders for their contribution to South Africa’s success. Working together, let us move this beautiful country forward. I thank you.
The Chairperson of the National House of Traditional Leaders, Kgosi Maubane (Kgabo!),
The Deputy Chairperson, Inkosi Sipho Mahlangu,
The Minister for Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs, Mr Des Van Rooyen,
Ministers and Premiers,
Deputy Ministers present,
MECs,
Members of Parliament,
Chairpersons and Deputies of the Provincial Houses,
Members of the National and Provincial Houses of Traditional Leaders and all Members,
Chairperson of the National Khoi-San Council (NKC) and your Councillors,
Chairperson and members of the National Interfaith Council of South Africa (NICSA),
President of CONTRALESA, Kgoshi Thobejane and your Executive Committee,
All traditional and Khoisan leaders present here,
Esteemed traditional leaders from the SADC region,

Ladies and gentlemen,

I greet you all on this important day on our calendar, the annual official opening of the National House of Traditional Leaders.

The institution, status and role of traditional leadership are recognised in Chapter 12 of the Constitution of the Republic.

Traditional leaders have an important place in the lives of many of our communities which is why we have the National House of Traditional Leaders and provincial houses in our country’s democratic system of governance.

As you are aware the importance of traditional leaders does not start now. They played a key role in fighting colonialism and apartheid.

Traditional leaders were present in the establishment of the ANC as the liberation movement that was to fight for decades to liberate South Africa and her people from subjugation and institutionalised racism.

It is for this reason therefore, that the crafters of the constitution in their wisdom, saw it necessary to ensure the recognition of traditional leadership in the Constitution of the republic.

Compatriots and esteemed leaders of our people,

As we mark 22 years of freedom this year, we confirm that as South Africa we are united against racism.

We were reminded sharply early this year that there is still a need to continue the fight against racism and prejudice and to ensure that respect for all regardless of their race, colour or creed is entrenched amongst all our people.

It is for this reason that we have declared March 2016 the month in which we spread the message that we are united against racism in our country.

We urge traditional leaders to join the campaign against racism in their areas, including participation in the national day against racism on 21 March 2016, Human Rights Day in Durban, KwaZulu-Natal.

Let all South Africans speak in on voice on March 21 and every other day, and say we are united against racism and that together we will continue to build a united, non-racial, non-sexist, democratic and prosperous South Africa.

Esteemed leaders of our people,

This Official Opening takes place a few weeks after the State of the Nation Address (SONA) and just after the Budget speech by the Minister of Finance.

We noted in both speeches that our economy faces difficulties due to the slow growth in the global economy as well as some domestic constraints.

It is important that we join hands as all sectors to promote inclusive economic growth and job creation, and to improve the business environment, despite the negative global economic climate.

We have spent the past few weeks working with the business community to support our economy through various measures. This includes changing the way we work as government.

It requires that we cut down on wastage and ensure that money is spent on the core business of government, which is delivering services to our people.

We will also be working hard as government to remove the obstacles to investment. Our people need jobs. And it is important for us to do everything we can to create the right environment for job creation.

I established an Inter-Ministerial Committee on Investment Promotion and it will meet for the first time tomorrow. I asked the business community for the first time to send a contribution to the meeting in the form of a submission on what exists in the regulatory environment that makes it difficult for them to do business with ease and help in growing the economy.

They have sent me a comprehensive contribution that I will discuss with Ministers tomorrow. In this regard, we are really working together to boost economic growth and job creation.

It is not the business of government per se to create jobs. We must create the right environment for business to thrive, so that they can create jobs for our people.

On the 15th of March I will convene the Labour Working Group with the economy being a key agenda item as well.

We know that when people have jobs, traditional leaders will be happy as it means a better life for your people.

I announced some of the steps our government, working together with other partners in business, organised labour, and civil society generally, is taking to ignite economic growth and create jobs for millions of people who are unemployed.

The National Development Plan remains our strategy for creating a South Africa with high levels of economic growth, employment and shared prosperity for all.

We have developed the Medium Term Strategic Framework, which is a five year programme for the implementation of the NDP.

In addition to the NDP, I announced a Nine Point Plan for turning around the economy.

We have been vigorously implementing the Nine Point Plan and the result of this work has been increased investment in various sectors of the economy.

These investments contribute to economic growth and create jobs for our people.

Chairperson,

In the SONA I provided feedback on some agricultural projects.

I am happy to inform this House as well that the Department of Rural Development and Land Reform is finalising business plans for all the 44 districts in the country where agricultural parks known as Agri-Parks will be established after consultation with stakeholders.

As an important stakeholder, we believe that the National House and the institution of traditional leadership must lead in the implementation of these plans.

One of the strategic objectives of the parks is to:
“bring under-utilised land (especially in Communal Areas) into full production within three years and expand irrigated agriculture”.

Again the Agricultural Parks programme has as one of its guiding principles “Maximising access to market to all farmers with a bias to emerging farmers and rural areas”.

This is a very important programme and we urge our traditional leaders to assist in ensuring its success.

Chairperson,

Let me also inform you that Government has developed an Agricultural Policy Action Plan under which food security at household level should be achieved through the utilisation of productive one million hectares of the communal land for food production.

The Fetsa Tlala/Xoshindlala Food Security Programme, through which communities are assisted to produce their own food, is part of this Policy Action Plan. I have been informed that traditional leaders continue to participate in this important programme.

Ngale Fetsa-Tlala noma uxoshindlala, abantu banikwa imbewu, amageja, ogandaganda nokunye ukuze balime bakhiqize ukudla kwasekhaya kanye nokokudayisa. Sigqugquzela ukuba zonke izindawo zamakhosi zibe nawo lomkhankaso kaFetsa Tlala/Xoshindlala. Akusetshenzwe, silime abantu bangabulawa indlala.

Chairperson,

We have noted that some of the productive communal land under traditional councils remains inadequately utilised.

I urge traditional leaders to encourage communities to plough and till the productive land so that they can produce healthy food for their families and reduce the levels of food insecurity and poverty that are so prevalent.

Esteemed leaders of our people,

One of the domestic constraints to growth in our country currently is the severe drought. It threatens the livelihoods of our people and has pushed most of the farmers to the edge of financial ruin.

Five provinces have declared a state of provincial drought disaster, namely KwaZulu-Natal, North West, Free State, Limpopo and Mpumalanga.

The situation is very difficult for many farmers. They have seen their livestock die which has cost a lot of money. Food prices will go up because of the drought.

You know this very well as many of these farms are in your areas.

Government has created a drought relief package focusing on the following:

• identification of land for the relocation of livestock,
• revitalisation of feedlots,
• drilling and equipment of boreholes,
• auction sales of livestock,
• firebreaks creation, and
• provision of feed and water for livestock.

A number of government departments are assisting in alleviating the effects of the drought. The Primary Focus currently is on Funding for Emergency or immediate Needs.

Interventions are sent to areas where existing water infrastructure is not functional due to drought and where there are no alternative means for water supply. Government is also assisting where water sources have dried up due to drought and communities do not have any alternative means for water supply.

In addition to this, the Department of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries has reprioritised funds to provide livestock feed and water to affected farmers.

The Department of Rural Development and Land Reform has reprioritised funds for livestock feed, livestock water, firebreaks, feedlots and auction sales.

The Department of Water and Sanitation has reprioritised funds for the provision of water for human consumption.

In addition to this, the Department of Cooperative Governance, through the National Disaster Management Centre, will augment funding from the Disaster Grants in case of that resources made available locally and provincially are exhausted.

There are shortfalls and there is still a need for assistance on the ground. It is a difficult period for farmers and communities alike.

But working together, we will overcome this hardship. We always overcome our challenges because we work together as South Africans when faced with difficulties.

Chairperson,

During the debate of my address to this august House last year, we spent a lot of time discussing the negative impact that land dispossession has had on the lives of black people in South Africa.

The dispossession of our land is the source of the poverty and inequality which have become the ugly hallmark of our nation and an impediment to a future of shared prosperity.

In my address last year I urged traditional leaders to join their efforts in claiming land on behalf of the communities they lead that was taken away rather than lodging competing claims.

I have been informed that some work in this regard has started, championed by the National House of Traditional Leaders.

I strongly believe that access to land and security of land tenure are key to development, especially agricultural development. Land reform lies at the centre of government’s efforts to bring about inclusive economic development. It is at the centre of the NDP.

I urge traditional leaders to thoughtfully and actively engage with the matter of land reform on behalf of the communities they lead.

I am raising this as we can talk about agriculture and food security but without access to land, our people cannot plough and feed themselves or contribute to economic growth.

Chairperson,

This year we mark several anniversaries which indicate the journey we have travelled on the road to freedom and democracy.

These include the 40th anniversary of the 16 June 1976 student uprising, the 60th anniversary of the Women’s March to the Union Buildings, and the 20th anniversary of the signing of the Constitution of the Republic by former President Nelson Mandela. The year 2016 is also the centenary of the University of Fort Hare.

Government will organise several events to mark these important milestones. These milestones remind us of where we come from and the journey we have travelled.

To further cement our history and ensure that it is preserved, we are continuing with establishment a new heritage landscape for the country.

We have identified a number of activities in this regard. This includes identifying historic sites, individuals and organisations that have made outstanding contributions to our liberation struggle and history and to the development of our cultural values.

The identified sites are being upgraded and declared National Heritage sites and will be maintained by the State.

The task of grading and declaring these places is by the South African Heritage Resource Agency (SAHRA).

Through the upgrading and declaration of these historic sites, we will ensure a more representative and inclusive South African history and heritage.

More importantly , this will also contribute towards shared values and a common national identity in the country.

Furthermore, the building and maintenance of new monuments and historic sites has a greater potential to stimulate economic activity and create much needed jobs in communities where these sites are located.

These sites will also contribute towards cultural tourism both domestic and international.

I will mention just a few of the sites.

The Department of Arts and Culture, in partnership with the National Heritage Monument Company, is conceptualising a National Heritage Monument which will include 400 life-size statues of heroes and heroines to be stationed at Fountains Valley in Tshwane.

Fifty nine of the four hundred statues have been completed from 2012 and were launched at Groenkloof Nature Reserve on 15 September 2015.

The renovations of the homestead of President OR Tambo and the upgrading of the Khananda heritage site started in 2012 as the first phase is complete. The Garden of Remembrance as well as the Interpretative Centre, which are second phase components as part of the OR Tambo Heritage Route in Mbizana, Eastern Cape, are in the construction phase.

The John Langalibalele Dube gravesite upgrade and memorial in Durban was unveiled as phase one, honouring the founding President of the African National Congress.

Phase two priority elements including an Amphitheatre, Access Driveway and Parking for the J L Dube Project are in the construction phase scheduled for completion this year.

This project is part of the Inanda Heritage Route which comprises sites associated with a number of prominent sites, people and events.

The Inquza Hill Museum, which provides the narrative of the historic and courageous Pondo Revolt of 1960 is under construction.

The Bhambatha statue in Greytown is completed, honouring the hero of the poll tax revolt in 1906.

The Wesleyan Church in Waaihoek where the African National Congress (ANC) was founded has been renovated and the exhibition, content and design has been presented to stakeholders for approval before installation.

Government is going to honour one of the great heroes of the struggle for liberation, the late president of the United Democratic Front, Mr Archie Gumede, through the erection of a statue. This courageous freedom fighter deserves such an honour.

Our youth and future generations must know and understand the story of our struggle for liberation, through visiting sites such as where this statue will be situated.

We will also be building monuments to mark painful periods in our history.

The Matola Monument and Interpretive Centre is completed and was unveiled by the two heads of state of the Republic of South Africa and Mozambique on 11 September 2015, honouring the freedom fighters who lost their lives in the hands of the brutal apartheid defence force when it raided Mozambique in 1981.

The notorious farm Vlakpaas, where freedom fighters were brutally tortured and murdered by the apartheid regime, will be developed into a heritage site.

Compatriots and esteemed leaders of our people,

It is often difficult to appreciate the progress that has been made when a country is facing a difficult economic environment such as the one we are currently facing.

Just over two decades ago the prospect of a democratic South Africa where all its citizens live in peace and freedom looked like a pipedream.

Working together we pulled our land back from the brink of a civil war. We are building a South Africa today where all of our people will live together in peace and friendship.

I am convinced that working together again we can overcome the economic headwinds we face.

Let us therefore work together to promote our country and market its many positive attributes amongst its people.

Sadly there are those who want our people to believe that they have not achieved anything since 1994. That is not true. South Africans have consolidated democracy and have begun to build a better life for all especially the poor through many programmes of government since 1994.

Our country is a success story.

We need to recognise that, while working hard to fix the problems that exist, which exist in all developing countries.

Chairperson,

We thank traditional leaders for their contribution to South Africa’s success.

Working together, let us move this beautiful country forward.

I thank you.