Honourable Ministers and Deputy Ministers of the United Arab Emirates and of the Republic of South Africa;Members of the UAE business community,Ambassadors and senior officials,Programme Director;Distinguished Guests;Ladies and Gentlemen; Good Day, I am greatly honoured to be afforded this opportunity to participate in this important event, a meeting with the United Arab Emirates business community. South Africa attaches great importance to its relationship with the United Arab Emirates. The UAE was part of those peace-loving nations that refused to trade and interact with the Apartheid regime. It waited for a free South Africa to start doing business with our people. The two countries have maintained strong bilateral relationship since formal diplomatic ties were first established in 1994 with a strong economic focus, and the UAE has become one of our main trading partners within the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC). I think it is prudent to mention that since my last visit to the UAE in November 2011, the first meeting of the Joint Commission between South Africa and the UAE has since taken place and South Africa is currently planning for the Second Meeting scheduled for later in 2016. These bilateral engagements between our two countries provide an opportunity for government and business to discuss issues of mutual interest and are a strategic platform to entrench our trade relations. Noteworthy also since my last visit is the sharp increase in total trade between South Africa and the UAE from one point eight billion US Dollars in 2011 to above two point two billion US Dollars in 2015.Major South African exports to the UAE include base metals and allied products, steel for construction and general engineering, machinery, electronics, minerals, defence equipment, chemicals, plastic goods, and food stuffs. Seventy per cent of South Africa’s imports from the UAE consist of crude oil. Other exports to South Africa include machinery, transportation equipment, consumer electronics, home appliances, computer accessories and textiles. I however, believe that our growing trade relationship can be further expanded to other sectors. Ladies and Gentlemen, The excellent air links between our two countries position us to further enhance our trade, especially in fresh produce. In Durban a project of planting vegetables for exports in the vicinity of the Dube Trade Port near the King Shaka International Airport targeting mainly the daily flights to Dubai shows how these air links could be exploited for the common good.The cross investment culture between our peoples is gaining momentum and must be encouraged. At present a total of 14 FDI projects were recorded as investments into South Africa from the UAE, representing a total capital investment of three billion Rand. South Africa is also a significant investor in the UAE and between January 2003 and June 2015 a total of 27 FDI projects from South Africa to UAE were recorded, representing a total capital investment of five billion Rand. I am certain that I am expressing an opinion shared by all of us in this room when I say more can still be done. I was impressed when I first learnt of the UAE Rail infrastructure, which with time, it is believed, may connect the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) nations. I believe South Africa can learn a lot from that project, since we have been tasked by our African brothers and sisters to drive the north-south corridor and other road and rail infrastructure projects.These are aimed at connecting our continent and promoting intra-African trade. Further to this, Dubai is preparing to host the World Expo 2020, where some 25 million people are expected to throng to Dubai. We feel that South African companies should take advantage of this development and avail their construction potential to our Emirati friends to ensure that World Expo 2020 becomes the best in history. Come 2020, our farming community will be at hand to ensure that there is more than sufficient fresh produce in the UAE markets. Despite the gloomy economic climate engulfing the world, we have adopted and stuck to our Vision 2030 National Development Plan (NDP), which guides our efforts to grow our economy at a far greater rate and decisively address unemployment, poverty, and inequality. Our Government has translated this NDP into Medium-Term Strategic Framework that outlines the priorities and actions for the five years of the present government. Additionally, last year we also outlined nine immediate priority areas to stimulate economic growth. Among these is the expanded beneficiation of our minerals. I am sure I am now speaking the same language with our Emirati friends because I have been informed that you also plan to move away from only exporting crude oil and other raw minerals, but instead to also beneficiate them and export processed goods as well. Our Nine Point Plan also targets the development of the ocean economy, something in which the UAE has registered significant progress. We therefore invite you to invest in our Operation Phakisa, and partner us as we turn our vast sea waters into an engine of growth. The NDP has placed industrialization among our top priorities. As developing countries, we are industrializing at a time when mankind is very conscious about environmental damage. This is unlike our developed partners to the north, who industrialized more than a century ago, when no one was seeing anything wrong with burning coal and more coal. As developing nations we must learn from one another on how to forge ahead with our industrialization plans without damaging our environment. Ladies and Gentlemen, South Africa has abundant iconic tourism attractions. We continue to see Emirati tourists and other expatriate communities based in the UAE travelling to South Africa. As you may be aware, South Africa enjoys the four seasons (Summer, Autumn, Winter and Spring). The two countries, UAE and South Africa, due to their geographic locations, find their seasons alternating. In other words, when the UAE experiences the scorching, unbearable summer, South Africa experiences winter, with most of our coastal areas enjoying relatively warm winters. &nnbsp;Many people from this part of the world travel to South Africa during the months of May through September for that pleasant experience. We are aware of the teething challenges that the newly-introduced amendments to our Visa regime have caused. We want to make it easier for the people to travel in and out of our friendly motherland. I can assure you that the Government is working on those issues and we’ll soon put them behind us. In conclusion, we regard this as a forum to exchange views and clarify issues. I wish to express our readiness to freely exchange views and discuss all issues during this Business Forum. My delegation and I will be happy to engage you on any topic regarding our country and, to a certain extent, even the continent. We further wish to encourage you as UAE-South Africa Business Forum to make it your responsibility to leave an everlasting mark on the development efforts of both South Africa and the UAE. As a forum, what happens in either South Africa or the UAE must be of interest or concern to you. You have a responsibility to the peoples of both nations. I can assure you that our Government will do everything humanely possible to help your businesses thrive in South Africa. We have put in place laws and policies to make that happen. South Africa is open for business – thriving business. I thank you.Issued by: The PresidencyPretoria