Programme Director, Minister of Employment and Labour, Mr Thulas Nxesi, Minister in The Presidency responsible for Women, Youth and Persons with Disability, Ms Maite Nkoana-Mashabane, Ministers and Deputy Ministers, Regional Director of the International Labour Organisation, Dr Joni Musabayana, Director of the CCMA, Mr Cameron Morajane, Chairperson of the Commission for Employment Equity, Ms Tabea Kabinde, Group Chief Executive Officer of the JSE, Dr Leila Fourie, Executive Director of NEDLAC, Ms Lisa Seftel, All social partners, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, I wish to congratulate the organisers of this webinar for focusing attention on the critical issue of violence and harassment in the workplace. I also want to thank our social partners from business, labour and civil society for your contribution to this discussion and for consistently supporting this process. The adoption of Convention 190 at the 108th session of the International Labour Organisation in June last year was a milestone in our efforts as the international community to advance gender equality and justice in all sectors of society. For the first time we now have a common framework to address, prevent and overcome violence and harassment in the world of work. The Convention sets the standard and it is our collective responsibility to ensure that its aspirations become a reality. It is fitting that we are having this discussion on the 2nd of December, which is an important – but not widely known – date on the international calendar. Seventy-one years ago on this day, the United Nations adopted Resolution 317(4) aimed at combating contemporary forms of slavery, including human trafficking, child labour, debt bondage and human trafficking. On this, the International Day for the Abolition of Slavery, we reaffirm our collective commitment to stamping out all forms of forced labour. While a comparison between workplace harassment and modern slavery may seem extreme, the reality is that millions of women in South Africa and around the world are being held in a bondage of silence at work. Whether they are in the boardrooms, in the office or on the factory floor, women are being subjected to harassment, unwanted sexual advances and even violence. Much of it is happening in silence, because victims are too afraid to speak out for fear of losing their jobs. This is not a problem of any particular social class. It affects working class women, women in middle management and even those in positions of leadership in companies and organisations. Workplace harassment thrives in a climate of intimidation, fear and silence. Let us be clear: harassment of women and girls in the world of work is a form of gender-based violence. As ILO Convention 190 notes, violence and harassment at work disproportionately affects women and girls. It is women and girls who are subjected to unwanted advances and inappropriate remarks. It is women and girls who are the victims of predatory co-workers and bosses who expect sexual favours in return for advancement. It is women and girls who are being sexually assaulted and even raped at work. In many cases, they do not report these acts of violence because they fear they will either not be believed, or that they will not see justice because the perpetrator is more powerful. This is both a labour rights issue and women’s rights issue. Harassment and violence at work impacts workers’ psychological and physical health. It limits the ability of women to access the labour market and remain or advance in the labour market. It impairs their dignity and self-esteem. It directly affects work performance and productivity, leading to high rates of absenteeism and frequent turnover of staff. It makes workplaces toxic, leads to conflict and negatively affects team performance. And as the Convention notes, violence and harassment impacts negatively on the reputations of companies, and is incompatible with the promotion of sustainable enterprises. Support for this Convention is about much more than subscribing to the constitutional values of human rights and dignity. It is also about making workplaces productive, about enabling employees to realise their potential, about building an inclusive economy and fostering social progress. As government, we are committed to making all spaces, including workplaces, safe from all forms of gender-based violence. Our ongoing work around Convention 190 is linked with Pillar 5 of the National Strategic Plan on Gender-based Violence and Femicide. This Pillar focuses on safe workplaces that are free of violence and sexual harassment against women and LGBTQIA+ persons. In the road towards ratification of this Convention, the Department of Employment and Labour has been leading a process of consultation on a Code of Good Practice. This is a critical policy tool to provide practical guidance to employers, employees, trade unions and others on how to develop and implement policies and programmes at workplace level. We want all sectors of society to join us in this journey. Whether we are in the public sector, the private sector, in educational institutions, in health facilities, in municipalities, in trade unions, in communities or in the faith sector, we all have a role to play. The ILO Convention and the Code of Good Practice both provide clear guidance on the practical measures that we can take. This starts with sending a clear signal that harassment and violence in the workplace is unacceptable. Employers must have a zero-tolerance policy. Employers need to look at practical measures such as the provision of transport for employees, having sufficient security measures to protect those who work late or in isolation, and making access to amenities such as toilets safer for women. If we create enabling environments where the rights and dignity of workers are respected, we contribute to the country’s overall economic performance. We are ever mindful of the urgency with which we must eliminate gender-based violence in all its forms and wherever it may be found. When South Africa assumed the Chair of the African Union in February this year, I said that ratifying international protocols that outlaw gender discrimination would be a priority of our term. The COVID-19 pandemic has disrupted many of our activities, but it has certainly not diminished our resolve. As we begin this Decade for Women’s Financial and Economic Inclusion, let us move with speed to ratify this Convention. As a country and as a continent we need to accelerate the momentum towards ratification. Making the world of work safe for women is not negotiable. It is fundamental to the realisation of the rights, dignity and potential of all. With your support, South Africa is firmly on the path towards ratification of ILO Convention 190. Let us move together towards workplaces that are free of all forms of harassment and violence. Let us move together towards a society where all people may be safe, secure and respected. I thank you.