Theme: “Women United in Moving South Africa Forward.”Deputy President Cyril Ramaphosa,Chairperson of the African Union Commission, Dr Nkosazana DlaminiZuma,The Minister in the Presidency Responsible for Women, Ms Susan Shabangu,Minister of Arts and Culture, Mr Nathi Mthethwa,MEC Nandi Mayathula-Khoza representing Gauteng Premier David Makhura and all Premiers and their delegations,All Ministers, Deputy Ministers, MECs,Veterans of the 1956 Women's March and other senior citizens,Your Excellencies Ambassadors and High Commissioners,Delegations from women organisations from various African countries present today,The President of the ANC Women’s League and Leadership and Members of all Women’s Formations,Heads of Chapter Nine InstitutionsWomen of South Africa,Compatriots, Today our country marks a historic milestone.On this day, 60 years ago, more than twenty thousand brave women marched to the seat of government, the Union Buildings to register their rejection of white supremacy and institutionalised racism.They marched to make it known to the apartheid regime, the country and the world, that they totally rejected pass laws which restricted their movements and made them pariahs in the land of their birth.The apartheid legislation required African persons to carry a “pass”, a special identification document which curtailed their freedom of movement, and the J G Strijdom regime sought to extend it to African women. The women came from every part of South Africa, from cities and towns, the reserves and the villages. It was women from every racial group, African, White, Indian, Coloured. They were united in their purpose and determination.They wanted the apartheid government and the then-Prime Minister, JG Strijdom to feel their anger and their resolve against the carrying of dompasses, and against the degradation of African women.Women marched again today. They also came from all provinces, from villages and townships, towns and cities. They came to celebrate the bravery of the women of 1956, who laid a firm foundation for the restoration of our birth right, freedom, and for the dignity of women.Sihlangene namhlanje ukugubha ubuqhawe bamakhosikazi amasha ngo-1956. Sigubha futhi ubuqhawe bamakhosikazi asezweni lakithi alwela inkululeko, abhekana nobunzima nokuhlukunyezwa abacindezeli ngesikhathi sobandlululo.Sikhumbula nabo bonke omamaa balahlekelwa izingane nezihlobo bebulawa abacindezeli, abadlula kobukhulu ubuhlungu.Sikhumbula omame abasuswa emiziniyabo ngenxa yemithetho yobandlululo, baba ondingasithebeni. Omama baseNingizimu Afrika bangamaqhawe.The march was organised by the Federation of South African Women (FEDSAW), a federation committed to challenging the idea that ‘a woman’s place is in the kitchen’.They declared that the woman’s place is ‘everywhere’ a woman chooses to be. The leaders of the 1956 Women’s March were Mme Sophia Williams-De Bruynwho is with us today, Mme Lillian Ngoyi, Mme Rahima Moosa and Mme Helen Joseph. We are so happy and delighted to have Mme Sophie de Bruynand also 22 other veterans of the march today with us. Your presence feels us with great pride.We pay tribute to the stalwarts of our struggle, Winnie Madikizela-Mandela, Dorothy Nyembe, Albertina Sisulu, Ruth Mompati, Ruth First, Bertha Gxowa and many others.We also pay tribute to women before 1956 who gave their lives to the liberation movement, often at a great personal cost, without any expectation of position or reward, such as our pioneer Charlotte Maxeke.Indeed O. R Tambo put it so well when he said:“We are together today, in South Africa, because of your struggles over decades, your resilience, and your defiance, because of the courage with which the women of South Africa responded so magnificently to the calls to resist apartheid made by the African National Congress”.The women filled the entire amphitheatre outside the Union Buildings and declared to Strydom that Wathinta abafazi wathinta imbokodo, uzofa!This morning, we launched the Women’s Living Heritage Monument at Lillian Ngoyi Square, a symbol of the bravery and patriotism of South African women, and a monument to their contribution to the liberation and democracy that we achieved. Their march was not in vain.We recognise many others who dared the apartheid state in 1956 and marched to Union Buildings, and also women in every part of the country, who contributed in various ways to the freedom we are enjoying today. We also recognise women who have contributed to building this country – the factory workers, domestic workers, farm workers, those who work on our roads and every other sphere.It is because of their heroic achievements that today government continues to work at improving the living conditions of households including those headed by women.They wanted a better life. The extension of basic services such as water, sanitation, electricity, education, health and others benefits women and children.The struggles of women enabled the ushering in of freedom and democracy, so that these services can be extended to all.Many women still live in difficult conditions. Some communities are still waiting for water, electricity, sanitation and housing. Women are still struggling as they travel long distances to fetch water. It is for this reason that work is continuing to improve the lives of our people each day.Government will not rest until decent basic services reach all our people.We know too, that women are troubled by unemployment. Work continues to improve the economic situation in the country through working together by business, government and labour. The economic situation is difficult for us and the world at large. But we will continue our efforts to improve the situation and create an environment in which the private sector can create jobs.The achievements of the women of 1956 have also translated to the opening up of the leadership space for women. There is a marked increase in the representation of women in parliament, government, the judiciary and other key positions in the public sector.Some women are also now heading giant corporations in the private sector, although much more still needs to be done in many companies.More and more South African women are choosing a career in the tough underground environment of mining including owning a mine, to list but a few achievements.Compatriots,We must never forget our achievements as a people.All South Africans, both males and females of all races, voted as equals before the law for the first time in the historic general elections of 27 April 1994.Last week on the 3rd of August, we voted again in the municipal elections, celebrating our democracy. Local government is the closest sphere to the people, and it is at this sphere that women are affected most regarding basic services.We congratulate all women who turned out to vote on the day, moving local government forward.As we begin working towards the next 60 years, we must take the transformation of our country forward. Black women suffered triple oppression in terms of race, gender, class and other disadvantaging factors. Now significant change is particularly noted in areas such as legal status, attitudes, women’s involvement in decision-making, especially at the political level, in employment, education, ownership of homes and businesses, the justice system, and economic participation. Though in some areas the pace of change appears to be rather slow, hence the need to upscale our effortsAs you may recall, last year on the 9th of August we launched “The Status of Women in the South African economy”Report which outlines progress made in five areas –education, the labour market, access to land property and credit, changes in poverty and inequality as well as unpaid work and contribution to the Gross Domestic Product (GDP). We are investing in education more than before, so that we can use this instrument to improve the lives of women. The education of women and girls is an apex priority.The participation of women in the economy is also critical. The establishment of women cooperatives and small businesses is being prioritised by government including providing support to women traders so that they can earn an income.One of the key instruments that government is employing to support women to start their businesses and cooperatives is Development Finance Institutions. We urge the private sector, especially banks, to come to the party and provide loans to women, especially women in rural areas, as part of promoting the economic development and growth envisaged in the National Development Plan.Therefore today, we set a new commitment to promote financial inclusion for all, especially for women and young people. We invite the private sector to work with us all the way towards this goal. Amakhosikazi adinga imisebenzi. Adinga usizo lukahulumeni ukuze avule amabhizinisi amancane kanye nezinye izindlela zokuziphilisa.Simemeza osomabhizinisi ikakhulu amabhange ukuthi avule iminyango abasize omama, kungabi uhulumeni kuphela oletha usizo.Sisebenzisana nosomabhizinisi nezinhlangano zabasebenzi ukwenza isimo somnotho sibe ngconywana. Akulula neze ngoba lenkinga ibhekene nomhlaba wonke. Sizoqhubeka sizamengoba impilo yabantu kufanele ibengcono.Siyabahalalisela omama baseNingizimuAfrika, abangamaqhawe. Siyababonga ngeqhaza abalidlala ngesikhathi silwela inkululeko, kanye neqhaza abasalidlala namhlanje.Omama basezweni lakithi bakhuthele, banesibindi, bayalithanda izwe labo.Yingakho beqhubeka nokusebenza kanzima besebenzela izingane zabo, nemindeni yabo.Sithi malibongwe igama lamakhosikazi!Masiqhubeke sisebenze kanyekanye sakhe izwe lethu, senze impilo ibengcobo kubantu bonke, ikakhulukazi omama.​Let us continue to work together to build our beautiful country so that every South African, especially girl children and women, can have a brighter future.Let women unite in moving South Africa forward!I thank you.Issued by: The PresidencyPretoria

Deputy President Cyril Ramaphosa,
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, Dr Nkosazana DlaminiZuma,
The Minister in the Presidency Responsible for Women, Ms Susan Shabangu,
Minister of Arts and Culture, Mr Nathi Mthethwa,
MEC Nandi Mayathula-Khoza representing Gauteng Premier David Makhura and all Premiers and their delegations,
All Ministers, Deputy Ministers, MECs,
Veterans of the 1956 Women's March and other senior citizens,
Your Excellencies Ambassadors and High Commissioners,
Delegations from women organisations from various African countries present today,
The President of the ANC Women’s League and Leadership and Members of all Women’s Formations,
Heads of Chapter Nine Institutions
Women of South Africa,
Compatriots,

Today our country marks a historic milestone.

On this day, 60 years ago, more than twenty thousand brave women marched to the seat of government, the Union Buildings to register their rejection of white supremacy and institutionalised racism.

They marched to make it known to the apartheid regime, the country and the world, that they totally rejected pass laws which restricted their movements and made them pariahs in the land of their birth.

The apartheid legislation required African persons to carry a “pass”, a special identification document which curtailed their freedom of movement, and the J G Strijdom regime sought to extend it to African women.

The women came from every part of South Africa, from cities and towns, the reserves and the villages.

It was women from every racial group, African, White, Indian, Coloured. They were united in their purpose and determination.

They wanted the apartheid government and the then-Prime Minister, JG Strijdom to feel their anger and their resolve against the carrying of dompasses, and against the degradation of African women.

Women marched again today.

They also came from all provinces, from villages and townships, towns and cities. They came to celebrate the bravery of the women of 1956, who laid a firm foundation for the restoration of our birth right, freedom, and for the dignity of women.

Sihlangene namhlanje ukugubha ubuqhawe bamakhosikazi amasha ngo-1956. Sigubha futhi ubuqhawe bamakhosikazi asezweni lakithi alwela inkululeko, abhekana nobunzima nokuhlukunyezwa abacindezeli ngesikhathi sobandlululo.

Sikhumbula nabo bonke omamaa balahlekelwa izingane nezihlobo bebulawa abacindezeli, abadlula kobukhulu ubuhlungu.

Sikhumbula omame abasuswa emiziniyabo ngenxa yemithetho yobandlululo, baba ondingasithebeni. Omama baseNingizimu Afrika bangamaqhawe.

The march was organised by the Federation of South African Women (FEDSAW), a federation committed to challenging the idea that ‘a woman’s place is in the kitchen’.

They declared that the woman’s place is ‘everywhere’ a woman chooses to be.

The leaders of the 1956 Women’s March were Mme Sophia Williams-De Bruynwho is with us today, Mme Lillian Ngoyi, Mme Rahima Moosa and Mme Helen Joseph. We are so happy and delighted to have Mme Sophie de Bruynand also 22 other veterans of the march today with us. Your presence feels us with great pride.

We pay tribute to the stalwarts of our struggle, Winnie Madikizela-Mandela, Dorothy Nyembe, Albertina Sisulu, Ruth Mompati, Ruth First, Bertha Gxowa and many others.

We also pay tribute to women before 1956 who gave their lives to the liberation movement, often at a great personal cost, without any expectation of position or reward, such as our pioneer Charlotte Maxeke.

Indeed O. R Tambo put it so well when he said:

“We are together today, in South Africa, because of your struggles over decades, your resilience, and your defiance, because of the courage with which the women of South Africa responded so magnificently to the calls to resist apartheid made by the African National Congress”.

The women filled the entire amphitheatre outside the Union Buildings and declared to Strydom that Wathinta abafazi wathinta imbokodo, uzofa!

This morning, we launched the Women’s Living Heritage Monument at Lillian Ngoyi Square, a symbol of the bravery and patriotism of South African women, and a monument to their contribution to the liberation and democracy that we achieved. Their march was not in vain.

We recognise many others who dared the apartheid state in 1956 and marched to Union Buildings, and also women in every part of the country, who contributed in various ways to the freedom we are enjoying today.

We also recognise women who have contributed to building this country – the factory workers, domestic workers, farm workers, those who work on our roads and every other sphere.

It is because of their heroic achievements that today government continues to work at improving the living conditions of households including those headed by women.

They wanted a better life. The extension of basic services such as water, sanitation, electricity, education, health and others benefits women and children.

The struggles of women enabled the ushering in of freedom and democracy, so that these services can be extended to all.

Many women still live in difficult conditions. Some communities are still waiting for water, electricity, sanitation and housing. Women are still struggling as they travel long distances to fetch water. It is for this reason that work is continuing to improve the lives of our people each day.

Government will not rest until decent basic services reach all our people.

We know too, that women are troubled by unemployment. Work continues to improve the economic situation in the country through working together by business, government and labour.

The economic situation is difficult for us and the world at large. But we will continue our efforts to improve the situation and create an environment in which the private sector can create jobs.

The achievements of the women of 1956 have also translated to the opening up of the leadership space for women.

There is a marked increase in the representation of women in parliament, government, the judiciary and other key positions in the public sector.

Some women are also now heading giant corporations in the private sector, although much more still needs to be done in many companies.

More and more South African women are choosing a career in the tough underground environment of mining including owning a mine, to list but a few achievements.

Compatriots,

We must never forget our achievements as a people.

All South Africans, both males and females of all races, voted as equals before the law for the first time in the historic general elections of 27 April 1994.

Last week on the 3rd of August, we voted again in the municipal elections, celebrating our democracy. Local government is the closest sphere to the people, and it is at this sphere that women are affected most regarding basic services.

We congratulate all women who turned out to vote on the day, moving local government forward.

As we begin working towards the next 60 years, we must take the transformation of our country forward. Black women suffered triple oppression in terms of race, gender, class and other disadvantaging factors.

Now significant change is particularly noted in areas such as legal status, attitudes, women’s involvement in decision-making, especially at the political level, in employment, education, ownership of homes and businesses, the justice system, and economic participation.

Though in some areas the pace of change appears to be rather slow, hence the need to upscale our efforts

As you may recall, last year on the 9th of August we launched “The Status of Women in the South African economy”Report which outlines progress made in five areas –education, the labour market, access to land property and credit, changes in poverty and inequality as well as unpaid work and contribution to the Gross Domestic Product (GDP).

We are investing in education more than before, so that we can use this instrument to improve the lives of women. The education of women and girls is an apex priority.

The participation of women in the economy is also critical. The establishment of women cooperatives and small businesses is being prioritised by government including providing support to women traders so that they can earn an income.

One of the key instruments that government is employing to support women to start their businesses and cooperatives is Development Finance Institutions.

We urge the private sector, especially banks, to come to the party and provide loans to women, especially women in rural areas, as part of promoting the economic development and growth envisaged in the National Development Plan.

Therefore today, we set a new commitment to promote financial inclusion for all, especially for women and young people.

We invite the private sector to work with us all the way towards this goal.

Amakhosikazi adinga imisebenzi. Adinga usizo lukahulumeni ukuze avule amabhizinisi amancane kanye nezinye izindlela zokuziphilisa.

Simemeza osomabhizinisi ikakhulu amabhange ukuthi avule iminyango abasize omama, kungabi uhulumeni kuphela oletha usizo.

Sisebenzisana nosomabhizinisi nezinhlangano zabasebenzi ukwenza isimo somnotho sibe ngconywana. Akulula neze ngoba lenkinga ibhekene nomhlaba wonke. Sizoqhubeka sizamengoba impilo yabantu kufanele ibengcono.

Siyabahalalisela omama baseNingizimuAfrika, abangamaqhawe. Siyababonga ngeqhaza abalidlala ngesikhathi silwela inkululeko, kanye neqhaza abasalidlala namhlanje.

Omama basezweni lakithi bakhuthele, banesibindi, bayalithanda izwe labo.

Yingakho beqhubeka nokusebenza kanzima besebenzela izingane zabo, nemindeni yabo.

Sithi malibongwe igama lamakhosikazi!

Masiqhubeke sisebenze kanyekanye sakhe izwe lethu, senze impilo ibengcobo kubantu bonke, ikakhulukazi omama.​

Let us continue to work together to build our beautiful country so that every South African, especially girl children and women, can have a brighter future.

Let women unite in moving South Africa forward!

I thank you.


Issued by: The Presidency
Pretoria