Programme Director,Ministers and Deputy Ministers,Premiers and MECs,Deputy Chair of SANAC, Ms Steve Letsike,UNFPA representative, Dr Esther Muia,USAID Deputy Mission Director for Southern Africa, Mr Littleton Tazewell,Global Fund Representative, Dr Carol Presern,Our social and development partners,All young people from Umgungundlovu and the rest of our country, The launch of this campaign – led by young people for young people – is an important milestone in our country’s journey towards youth empowerment and the achievement of an AIDS-free generation. This innovative campaign aims to mobilise all sections of society to address five critical challenges facing young people. These challenges include the high number of new HIV infections among adolescent girls and young women, high rates of teenage pregnancy, poor retention of learners in high schools, high rates of sexual and gender based violence, and high rates of youth employment. nbsp;Despite our remarkable success in saving lives through the provision of free treatment for people living with HIV and AIDS, it is estimated that nearly 2,000 girls and young women between the ages of 15 and 24 get infected by HIV in this country each week. This is highest rate of new HIV infections in any age or gender category. This is one of the highest rates in the world and is the reason that we are launching an ambitious and innovative campaign targeting this group of highly vulnerable young people. This campaign is informed by the knowledge that HIV thrives on ignorance, in conditions of poverty and in situations of unequal gender relations. It thrives on unsafe sex, destructive behaviour and the abuse of alcohol and drugs. By supporting their peers and taking the lead, young people are working to change this narrative. The campaign seeks to build the confidence of women, build their resilience and unlock their strength and worth. The achievement of an AIDS-free generation requires a fundamental change in sexual behaviour. This campaign will therefore reach out to men. It will encourage men – both young and older – to use condoms, stick to one sexual partner and not to prey on younger girls and women. It will encourage men to play a central role in promoting safer sexual behaviour and in bringing an end to violence and abuse Only a comprehensive multi-sectoral campaign at the level of the community will bring about this change. All government departments will work with NGOs in the communities through our national, provincial and local AIDS councils to ensure this campaign succeeds. I want to make a special plea to our mayors to take up the leadership of this campaign in their municipalities. Girls and boys, women and men, need to assume responsibility for preventing teenage pregnancy, which diminishes the life opportunities for young women. Young people, with the support of their parents, caregivers, communities and government, will be at centre of national efforts to keep girls in school until matric. That is because education provides an opportunity to overcome the impediments to a successful, fulfilling life. As our late President Nelson Mandela said: “It is through education that the daughter of a peasant can become a doctor, that a son of a mineworker can become the head of the mine, that a child of farm workers can become the president of a great nation.” This campaign deliberately aims to increase economic opportunities for young people, particularly young women. We urge young women and girls to be part of decision-making in their schools, clinics and communities. This campaign will encourage greater use of services provided by government and other stakeholders. Ladies and Gentlemen, We extend heartfelt gratitude to all our social and development partners who are already doing critical work to reduce HIV infection rates, teenage pregnancy, gender based violence and high rates of unemployment among young women. In April this year, the US Government approved a $68 million grant for the DREAMS project which will be implemented in partnership with SANAC and the South African government. This project will reach girls and young women in 19 municipalities in Gauteng and KwaZulu-Natal. The Global Fund has committed an additional $62 million towards our national campaign to prevent new HIV infections among young women. The German government has also committed 12 million euros to implement a similar programme targeting young women in the Buffalo City Municipality. It is our intention to expand this programme over the next three years to all 51 municipalities throughout the country in which we have witnessed a high incidence of new HIV infections and high levels of teenage pregnancy. The launch of this campaign should be a day of great celebration. We must celebrate because our young people are reclaiming their power, reclaiming their dignity and reclaiming their future. We celebrate these young people, who, in asserting their agency,are defying darkness, ignorance and hopelessness. They are reminding us that young people carry the dreams of the nation. Together with our partners, we are encouraged, inspired and determined to support them. They are acting today – and taking action now – to achieve an AIDS-free generation in their lifetime and to seize the opportunities that our democracy has brought us. As we remember the courage and heroism of the 1976 generation during youth month, we should also recall the lives of Gugu Dlamini and Nkosi Johnson. They are South African champions who gave a face to the HIV pandemic. They died fighting for access to treatment. They died fighting against prejudice, stigma and discrimination against people living with HIV. Today, South Africa has the largest antiretroviral treatment programme in the world, our policies prohibit discrimination against people living with HIV, and we have programmes in place to create awareness and fight stigma. As we approach the International AIDS Conference in Durban next month, we can declare with confidence that your generation will lead us to a brighter future. As Madiba said, “Sometimes it falls upon a generation to be great. You can be that great generation. Let your greatness blossom.” You – our youth – are that great generation. You – our youth – will move South Africa forward! I thank you.
Programme Director,
Ministers and Deputy Ministers,
Premiers and MECs,
Deputy Chair of SANAC, Ms Steve Letsike,
UNFPA representative, Dr Esther Muia,
USAID Deputy Mission Director for Southern Africa, Mr Littleton Tazewell,
Global Fund Representative, Dr Carol Presern,
Our social and development partners,
All young people from Umgungundlovu and the rest of our country,

The launch of this campaign – led by young people for young people – is an important milestone in our country’s journey towards youth empowerment and the achievement of an AIDS-free generation.

This innovative campaign aims to mobilise all sections of society to address five critical challenges facing young people.

These challenges include the high number of new HIV infections among adolescent girls and young women, high rates of teenage pregnancy, poor retention of learners in high schools, high rates of sexual and gender based violence, and high rates of youth employment.
nbsp;
Despite our remarkable success in saving lives through the provision of free treatment for people living with HIV and AIDS, it is estimated that nearly 2,000 girls and young women between the ages of 15 and 24 get infected by HIV in this country each week.

This is highest rate of new HIV infections in any age or gender category.

This is one of the highest rates in the world and is the reason that we are launching an ambitious and innovative campaign targeting this group of highly vulnerable young people.

This campaign is informed by the knowledge that HIV thrives on ignorance, in conditions of poverty and in situations of unequal gender relations.

It thrives on unsafe sex, destructive behaviour and the abuse of alcohol and drugs.

By supporting their peers and taking the lead, young people are working to change this narrative.

The campaign seeks to build the confidence of women, build their resilience and unlock their strength and worth.

The achievement of an AIDS-free generation requires a fundamental change in sexual behaviour.

This campaign will therefore reach out to men.

It will encourage men – both young and older – to use condoms, stick to one sexual partner and not to prey on younger girls and women.

It will encourage men to play a central role in promoting safer sexual behaviour and in bringing an end to violence and abuse

Only a comprehensive multi-sectoral campaign at the level of the community will bring about this change.

All government departments will work with NGOs in the communities through our national, provincial and local AIDS councils to ensure this campaign succeeds.

I want to make a special plea to our mayors to take up the leadership of this campaign in their municipalities.

Girls and boys, women and men, need to assume responsibility for preventing teenage pregnancy, which diminishes the life opportunities for young women.

Young people, with the support of their parents, caregivers, communities and government, will be at centre of national efforts to keep girls in school until matric.

That is because education provides an opportunity to overcome the impediments to a successful, fulfilling life.

As our late President Nelson Mandela said:

“It is through education that the daughter of a peasant can become a doctor, that a son of a mineworker can become the head of the mine, that a child of farm workers can become the president of a great nation.”

This campaign deliberately aims to increase economic opportunities for young people, particularly young women.

We urge young women and girls to be part of decision-making in their schools, clinics and communities.

This campaign will encourage greater use of services provided by government and other stakeholders.

Ladies and Gentlemen,

We extend heartfelt gratitude to all our social and development partners who are already doing critical work to reduce HIV infection rates, teenage pregnancy, gender based violence and high rates of unemployment among young women.

In April this year, the US Government approved a $68 million grant for the DREAMS project which will be implemented in partnership with SANAC and the South African government.

This project will reach girls and young women in 19 municipalities in Gauteng and KwaZulu-Natal.

The Global Fund has committed an additional $62 million towards our national campaign to prevent new HIV infections among young women.

The German government has also committed 12 million euros to implement a similar programme targeting young women in the Buffalo City Municipality.

It is our intention to expand this programme over the next three years to all 51 municipalities throughout the country in which we have witnessed a high incidence of new HIV infections and high levels of teenage pregnancy.

The launch of this campaign should be a day of great celebration.

We must celebrate because our young people are reclaiming their power, reclaiming their dignity and reclaiming their future.

We celebrate these young people, who, in asserting their agency,
are defying darkness, ignorance and hopelessness.

They are reminding us that young people carry the dreams of the nation.

Together with our partners, we are encouraged, inspired and determined to support them.

They are acting today – and taking action now – to achieve an AIDS-free generation in their lifetime and to seize the opportunities that our democracy has brought us.

As we remember the courage and heroism of the 1976 generation during youth month, we should also recall the lives of Gugu Dlamini and Nkosi Johnson.

They are South African champions who gave a face to the HIV pandemic.

They died fighting for access to treatment.

They died fighting against prejudice, stigma and discrimination against people living with HIV.

Today, South Africa has the largest antiretroviral treatment programme in the world, our policies prohibit discrimination against people living with HIV, and we have programmes in place to create awareness and fight stigma.

As we approach the International AIDS Conference in Durban next month, we can declare with confidence that your generation will lead us to a brighter future.

As Madiba said,

“Sometimes it falls upon a generation to be great. You can be that great generation. Let your greatness blossom.”

You – our youth – are that great generation.

You – our youth – will move South Africa forward!

I thank you.