Chairperson of the IEC and Commissioners,Deputy President of the Republic,Chief Justice of the Republic,Leaders of political parties,Fellow South Africans,We have concluded yet another round of competently run and successful elections. This is a testament to the progress we are making as a people and also to the maturity of our democracy.I wish to extend a word of gratitude to the millions of South Africans who went out to vote, some under difficult weather conditions.Let me also extend our collective gratitude to the commissioners and staff of the Independent Electoral Commission.The commissioners and IEC staff worked long hours, and delivered an efficient and fair election yet again.They have once again affirmed the faith and confidence our people have in the IEC and the integrity of our elections.These elections were hotly contested, with competing parties passionately arguing their points of view in attempts to win the favour of the electorate. That is how it should be in a democracy.We congratulate all the parties that have done well in these elections, including those who have gained new municipalities to run. We wish them all the best.We congratulate the people too on the outcome, as they are the real victors. Their will must prevail.I also wish to thank the political parties, independent candidates and their supporters for contributing to a largely peaceful, free and fair election.You have shown the world that South Africa is a thriving democracy where differences of political opinion and diverse political preferences are allowed to flourish.Political parties waged their campaigns under different political banners. However, we are one people. In this regard, the elected representatives must govern on behalf of and in the best interests of all South Africans. They must build an accessible, caring and efficient local government system throughout the country, regardless of which party controls the municipality.This election has given all political parties and candidates an opportunity to interact with South Africans across the country. The concerns that have been raised by the electorate during the elections must be attended to by all so that our people can experience the fruits of freedom and democracy.We urge our people to remain engaged by participating in ward communities and other structures and be part of the running of their municipalities. In this way there will be no gap between the people and the municipal governments. That is how strong democracies are built, when the people participate.We are proud of our people. We are proud of how South Africans manage their renewal of mandates and also the change of governments. It is done peacefully through the ballot box. Our democracy is maturing and we congratulate our people for their participation in the consolidation of democracy.I am convinced that if we work together and harder, we will achieve our dream of building a just, fair, equal and prosperous South Africa. It is possible.Let us get back to work, and build our country together.I thank you all. Issued by: The PresidencyPretoria
Chairperson of the IEC and Commissioners,
Deputy President of the Republic,
Chief Justice of the Republic,
Leaders of political parties,
Fellow South Africans,

We have concluded yet another round of competently run and successful elections. This is a testament to the progress we are making as a people and also to the maturity of our democracy.

I wish to extend a word of gratitude to the millions of South Africans who went out to vote, some under difficult weather conditions.

Let me also extend our collective gratitude to the commissioners and staff of the Independent Electoral Commission.

The commissioners and IEC staff worked long hours, and delivered an efficient and fair election yet again.

They have once again affirmed the faith and confidence our people have in the IEC and the integrity of our elections.

These elections were hotly contested, with competing parties passionately arguing their points of view in attempts to win the favour of the electorate. That is how it should be in a democracy.

We congratulate all the parties that have done well in these elections, including those who have gained new municipalities to run. We wish them all the best.

We congratulate the people too on the outcome, as they are the real victors. Their will must prevail.

I also wish to thank the political parties, independent candidates and their supporters for contributing to a largely peaceful, free and fair election.

You have shown the world that South Africa is a thriving democracy where differences of political opinion and diverse political preferences are allowed to flourish.

Political parties waged their campaigns under different political banners. However, we are one people.

In this regard, the elected representatives must govern on behalf of and in the best interests of all South Africans. They must build an accessible, caring and efficient local government system throughout the country, regardless of which party controls the municipality.

This election has given all political parties and candidates an opportunity to interact with South Africans across the country.

The concerns that have been raised by the electorate during the elections must be attended to by all so that our people can experience the fruits of freedom and democracy.

We urge our people to remain engaged by participating in ward communities and other structures and be part of the running of their municipalities. In this way there will be no gap between the people and the municipal governments. That is how strong democracies are built, when the people participate.

We are proud of our people. We are proud of how South Africans manage their renewal of mandates and also the change of governments. It is done peacefully through the ballot box.

Our democracy is maturing and we congratulate our people for their participation in the consolidation of democracy.

I am convinced that if we work together and harder, we will achieve our dream of building a just, fair, equal and prosperous South Africa. It is possible.

Let us get back to work, and build our country together.

I thank you all.



Issued by: The Presidency
Pretoria