Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen, As we conclude our business today, allow me to express my sincere appreciation to all of you for your participation. Your contribution has made this virtual session highly engaging, informative and interactive as we seek to accelerate the implementation of our programmes towards the attainment of the Agenda 2063. We have been able cover a range of issues on regional integration, division of labour and our continental strategy to overcome COVID-19. The pandemic has shown a great deal of resilience and countries that have experienced a decline in infections have also encountered surges in infections that have made them to revisit the lockdown measures. We must try to avoid that scenario in Africa. We remain optimistic the momentum will not be lost and we will ensure that all outstanding work is completed. The report on the status of regional integration and the insightful perspectives provided by Chairpersons of the RECs show that commendable progress has been made in the integration process, and that implementation of the AfCFTA is a priority. With the finish line now in sight, we must make this final push; and ensure all outstanding issues on Phases 1 and 2 are finalised in order for us to start trading by the 1st of January 2021. On the Division of Labour, we welcome progress made in the development of the detailed proposal on the Division of Labour by the AUC, the AUDA-NEPAD, AfCFTA Secretariat, the APRM, the RECs and RMs and Member States in the areas of trade, political affairs and peace and security. We look forward to the finalisation of the remaining areas concerning the Division of Labour for consideration at the latest by the 35th Ordinary Session of the AU Assembly in February 2022. This will give the relevant stakeholders enough time to consult and to come back with a comprehensive document which has the buy-in of everyone. In this context, we would have fulfilled the aspirations set out in the institutional reform process. We have also considered and noted with appreciation the report of H.E. Nana Akufo Addo, the President of the Republic of Ghana and the Champion of the AU Financial Institutions. The establishment of the AU Financial Institutions will go a long way in fulfilling the objectives of the Abuja Treaty and further deepen the continental economic integration project. It is imperative that we strengthen the RECs as building-blocks for Africa’s continental integration. Intensified coordination and harmonisation will bring us closer to the realisation of the African Economic Community in line with the principles of the Abuja Treaty. With these few words I thank you for your participation once more. Thanks to the preparations undertaken under the guidance of the Executive Council and the commendable work of the AU Commission we have been able to have a productive Mid-Year Coordination Meeting. On this note I hereby declare the 2nd Mid-Year Coordination Meeting officially closed. I thank you.