Speaker of the National Assembly, Ms Baleka Mbete,Chairperson of the Independent Electoral Commission, Mr Glen Mashinini,Honourable Members of Parliament,Commissioners of the Independent Electoral Commission,Representatives of various political parties,Ladies and Gentlemen, It is a distinct pleasure to receive on behalf of our government and country the Atlas of Results for the 2014 elections. The Atlas of Results is an innovation pioneered by our highly regarded Independent Electoral Commission. This Atlas of Results impresses not only because it illustrates the geographical basis of the 2014 election results, but also because it is compiled in a manner that informs critical political planning as we approach the 2016 local government elections. We commend the IEC and its partners for producing a valuable resource that reinforces the integrity of political organisation in our country. Elections that are regular, free, fair and vibrant are integral to our identity as a new nation. Our elections are about creating an inclusive South Africa on the basis of equal participation. They are about creating a united, non-racial, non-sexist and prosperous society underpinned by a progressive democratic Constitution. It is only through the vote that representatives of the people derive a mandate and governing structures derive legitimacy. We have had a proud record of free and fair elections in South Africa. Our electoral institutions are known for the quick resolution of disputes. We have had court rulings and by-elections that have either confirmed or overturned original election results. It is to the credit of all political parties and the integrity of our system of judicial review that parties and voters have accepted such outcomes. The right to vote must never be taken for granted. In honouring those who lost their lives in the struggle for universal suffrage, and to secure the future of our children, we have a responsibility to deepen popular participation in our elections. We thank the IEC and the various political parties and civil society formations for their work in voter education and mobilisation. Honourable Members,Distinguished Guests, This Atlas of Results should inform our efforts to overcome the spatial distortions of racial segregation. Apartheid’s spatial geography continues to thwart our efforts to reverse the economic marginalisation of many South Africans. The apartheid regime sought to divide our people along racial and ethnic lines based on artificially created boundaries. nbsp;This remains an affront to our firmly held view that South Africa belongs to all who live in it – black and white. While the Atlas of Results shows how votes were politically distributed within certain geographies in the country, we must be clear that these concentrations must not be considered immutable. No part of the country should be considered the inalienable political turf of any one party. We cannot tolerate no-go areas. We must remember that elections are not primarily about the fortunes of parties. Elections are, first and foremost, about improving the lives of South Africans. This Atlas is therefore an instrument to reinforce public confidence in the political process. It allows voters and those seeking election to make informed political decisions. We must use this Atlas to excite and mobilise voters. We must use it to reinforce the right of all parties and candidates to campaign freely in all constituencies. We must use it to encourage more South Africans to become politically active and play their role as active citizens. Let us use these numbers to reinforce democracy. Let us use this Atlas to remind ourselves of the great distance we have travelled in the last 21 years. After centuries of conflict, we are now able to settle our differences at the ballot box. As we receive this Atlas, we reiterate the call made by President Jacob Zuma in the State of the Nation Address last week to all citizens over the age of 18 to register to vote during the first registration weekend on 5 and 6 March 2016. We call on all those who have something to say, to register to vote. We call on all those who want to make a decisive break with the past, to register to vote. We call on all those who reject racism, sexism and all forms of discrimination, to register to vote. We call on those who want better streets, better public transport, better municipal services and better community infrastructure, to register to vote. We call on all those who seek a better life for all, to register to vote. This Atlas provides a wonderful portrait of a country that embraces democracy and a people that are deeply invested in building a new nation. We commend the Independent Electoral Commission for making it possible. I thank you. Issued by: the PresidencyPretoria
Speaker of the National Assembly, Ms Baleka Mbete,
Chairperson of the Independent Electoral Commission, Mr Glen Mashinini,
Honourable Members of Parliament,
Commissioners of the Independent Electoral Commission,
Representatives of various political parties,
Ladies and Gentlemen,

It is a distinct pleasure to receive on behalf of our government and country the Atlas of Results for the 2014 elections.

The Atlas of Results is an innovation pioneered by our highly regarded Independent Electoral Commission.

This Atlas of Results impresses not only because it illustrates the geographical basis of the 2014 election results, but also because it is compiled in a manner that informs critical political planning as we approach the 2016 local government elections.

We commend the IEC and its partners for producing a valuable resource that reinforces the integrity of political organisation in our country.

Elections that are regular, free, fair and vibrant are integral to our identity as a new nation.

Our elections are about creating an inclusive South Africa on the basis of equal participation.

They are about creating a united, non-racial, non-sexist and prosperous society underpinned by a progressive democratic Constitution.

It is only through the vote that representatives of the people derive a mandate and governing structures derive legitimacy.

We have had a proud record of free and fair elections in South Africa.

Our electoral institutions are known for the quick resolution of disputes.

We have had court rulings and by-elections that have either confirmed or overturned original election results.

It is to the credit of all political parties and the integrity of our system of judicial review that parties and voters have accepted such outcomes.

The right to vote must never be taken for granted.

In honouring those who lost their lives in the struggle for universal suffrage, and to secure the future of our children, we have a responsibility to deepen popular participation in our elections.

We thank the IEC and the various political parties and civil society formations for their work in voter education and mobilisation.

Honourable Members,
Distinguished Guests,

This Atlas of Results should inform our efforts to overcome the spatial distortions of racial segregation.

Apartheid’s spatial geography continues to thwart our efforts to reverse the economic marginalisation of many South Africans.

The apartheid regime sought to divide our people along racial and ethnic lines based on artificially created boundaries.
nbsp;
This remains an affront to our firmly held view that South Africa belongs to all who live in it – black and white.

While the Atlas of Results shows how votes were politically distributed within certain geographies in the country, we must be clear that these concentrations must not be considered immutable.

No part of the country should be considered the inalienable political turf of any one party.

We cannot tolerate no-go areas.

We must remember that elections are not primarily about the fortunes of parties.

Elections are, first and foremost, about improving the lives of South Africans.

This Atlas is therefore an instrument to reinforce public confidence in the political process.

It allows voters and those seeking election to make informed political decisions.

We must use this Atlas to excite and mobilise voters.

We must use it to reinforce the right of all parties and candidates to campaign freely in all constituencies.

We must use it to encourage more South Africans to become politically active and play their role as active citizens.

Let us use these numbers to reinforce democracy.

Let us use this Atlas to remind ourselves of the great distance we have travelled in the last 21 years.

After centuries of conflict, we are now able to settle our differences at the ballot box.

As we receive this Atlas, we reiterate the call made by President Jacob Zuma in the State of the Nation Address last week to all citizens over the age of 18 to register to vote during the first registration weekend on 5 and 6 March 2016.

We call on all those who have something to say, to register to vote.

We call on all those who want to make a decisive break with the past, to register to vote.

We call on all those who reject racism, sexism and all forms of discrimination, to register to vote.

We call on those who want better streets, better public transport, better municipal services and better community infrastructure, to register to vote.

We call on all those who seek a better life for all, to register to vote.

This Atlas provides a wonderful portrait of a country that embraces democracy and a people that are deeply invested in building a new nation.

We commend the Independent Electoral Commission for making it possible.

I thank you.

Issued by: the Presidency
Pretoria