Your Excellency President Hollande;Vice Chairpersons Dr Margaret Chan, Mr Angel Gurria and Mr Guy Ryder;Members of the Commission;Members of the Expert Group;Ladies and GentlemenLet me begin by expressing our heartfelt condolences to the Belgian nation for the precious lives lost in the senseless terrorist bombing that took place yesterday in Brussels. We join the world in strongly condemning these tragic and cruel acts of terror and extremism.While our thoughts are with those who have lost loved ones, we wish all those injured a speedy recovery.Terrorism continues to be a serious threat to world peace and addressing the root causes of terrorism is critical in order to find lasting solutions.Ladies and GentlemenI would like to thank President Hollande for his introductory remarks and the warm welcome extended to me and my delegation in this lovely city of Lyon.May I also take the opportunity to commend the United Nations Secretary-General, Mr Ban Ki-moon, for establishing the High-Level Commission on Health Employment and Economic Development.I am humbled to have been invited to serve as co-Chair of this Commission, and, in particular, to be doing so with President Hollande. I take this opportunity to welcome the Vice Chairs and Commissioners. The work of the Commission goes to the heart of implementing the global 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.We know what needs to be done.Ours is to move with speed to demonstrate our unwavering commitment to this process.Health workforce shortages are growing in developing countries, including South Africa.Highly trained health care workers often migrate to advanced economies where they are readily absorbed, never to return.By training millions of health care workers all over the world and creating employment opportunities, we will go a long way to address the triple challenge of unemployment, poverty and inequality faced by developing countries.It will also contribute positively to our response to global epidemic outbreaks as recently witnessed with Ebola in West Africa.We know that communicable diseases do not respect international boundaries, nor do they need any visa to travel across countries.It is our hope that this Commission will come up with recommendations which will make a difference in the lives of people across the globe, particularly for women and youth who continue to carry a disproportionate burden brought about by poverty, unemployment and inequality.I thank you.
Your Excellency President Hollande;

Vice Chairpersons Dr Margaret Chan, Mr Angel Gurria and Mr Guy Ryder;

Members of the Commission;

Members of the Expert Group;

Ladies and Gentlemen

Let me begin by expressing our heartfelt condolences to the Belgian nation for the precious lives lost in the senseless terrorist bombing that took place yesterday in Brussels. We join the world in strongly condemning these tragic and cruel acts of terror and extremism.

While our thoughts are with those who have lost loved ones, we wish all those injured a speedy recovery.

Terrorism continues to be a serious threat to world peace and addressing the root causes of terrorism is critical in order to find lasting solutions.

Ladies and Gentlemen

I would like to thank President Hollande for his introductory remarks and the warm welcome extended to me and my delegation in this lovely city of Lyon.

May I also take the opportunity to commend the United Nations Secretary-General, Mr Ban Ki-moon, for establishing the High-Level Commission on Health Employment and Economic Development.

I am humbled to have been invited to serve as co-Chair of this Commission, and, in particular, to be doing so with President Hollande.

I take this opportunity to welcome the Vice Chairs and Commissioners. The work of the Commission goes to the heart of implementing the global 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.

We know what needs to be done.

Ours is to move with speed to demonstrate our unwavering commitment to this process.

Health workforce shortages are growing in developing countries, including South Africa.

Highly trained health care workers often migrate to advanced economies where they are readily absorbed, never to return.

By training millions of health care workers all over the world and creating employment opportunities, we will go a long way to address the triple challenge of unemployment, poverty and inequality faced by developing countries.

It will also contribute positively to our response to global epidemic outbreaks as recently witnessed with Ebola in West Africa.

We know that communicable diseases do not respect international boundaries, nor do they need any visa to travel across countries.

It is our hope that this Commission will come up with recommendations which will make a difference in the lives of people across the globe, particularly for women and youth who continue to carry a disproportionate burden brought about by poverty, unemployment and inequality.

I thank you.
