CEO of the South African Forum of Civil Engineering Contractors, Mr Webster Mfebe, Members of SAFCEC, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, It is an honour and privilege to address the 2017 SAFCEC Presidential Gala Dinner. It is fitting that the Forum has chosen as its theme, “Ready to Deliver”, because this captures the sentiments of many South Africans. In villages and towns, in townships and cities, in churches and rallies, South Africans are united in popular song capturing their readiness for a new era of implementation. Theirs is an expression of hope for a new dawn that guarantees their inalienable right to dignity and place in our society. Theirs is a call for a more humane society, where talent, hard work and excellence is nurtured and rewarded, not stifled and marginalised. Our people are one in their demand for a just society based on social inclusion and shared prosperity. They want a country where one’s race, gender or class does not determine their chances to meaningfully contribute to the wellbeing of our society. They are acutely aware that an economy that caters only for a privileged few is not only morally reprehensible, but is also unsustainable. We are thus heartened to see an organisation like SAFCEC that is attuned to the wishes of our citizens and taking the necessary actions to build a just and inclusive future. We extend our heartfelt appreciation to SAFCEC for its ground breaking initiative to partner with government to transform our built environment which historically was an integral part of the architecture of grand apartheid. We applaud the Forum for leading the Voluntary Rebuilding Programme which led to a landmark agreement with our government exactly a year ago. This initiative has earmarked R1.5 billion towards supporting emerging contractors. It will also support black engineers and artisans and provide social upliftment programmes in poor and needy communities. We encourage other established business to follow in the footsteps of the Forum to develop the capabilities of our diverse nation and to support emerging black businesses in the sector. Ladies and Gentlemen, The members of this Forum are literally building the National Development Plan. Infrastructure is critical to the growth of our economy, the expansion of our economic potential, the creation of jobs and the improvement of people’s lives. It requires effective collaboration between government and the private sector, efficient deployment of our national resources and, most importantly, the effective marshalling of the country’s engineering and other skills. Through the significant investments made by both the public and private sectors, the apartheid landscape is progressibly changing. Cranes tower over our cityscapes. We see continuous investments in social infrastructure and public amenities that not only benefit the poorest of the poor, but improve our economic capacity. Each day, we see new roads being built. We see public assets like hospitals, clinics, schools, universities and courts being built through partnerships between government and the private sector. We see low cost housing developments where there were once only shacks. And in this process, we are changing lives. We are bringing services closer to communities. We are creating more productive spaces and conducive work places. And most importantly, we are creating jobs. We are aware of the challenges that the sector faces as it is presented with technologies and innovations that could potentially replace the jobs that are so badly needed in our economy. While we should not stand in the way of technological advancements that brings economic and social benefit, we commend those firms that have maintained labour intensive methods to deliver infrastructure. We look to the built environment sector to make our society more inclusive by bringing South Africans into shared spaces – to close the physical and social distances caused by apartheid social engineering. This will require that we fully embrace the imperative of social transformation in word and deed. To be ready, means that that the leadership of SAFCEC and its members must do even more to reflect the diversity of our nation. To grow achieve sustainable and inclusive economic growth, we need more black and female participants. It is in infrastructure development and spatial planning where the public and private sector are inextricably linked. This means recognising that our progress as a nation is linked to this relationship. As a developmental state, the private sector cannot see its role in this relationship as only making huge margins at all costs. We must condemn those instances where contractors thriving under the cover of this strong partnership commit collusion. Collusion and anticompetitive behaviour is a form of corruption that undermines the proper management of public resources and undermines social cohesion. We must exorcise from our thinking the idea that government must pay more for goods and service. Government, which buys on behalf of the poor, should be able to procure at competitive rates. Ladies and Gentlemen, We look to this industry to help turn Vision 2030 of the National Development Plan into a reality. The built environment must be a place in which all South Africans will be comfortable. It must be a place where all our citizens will feel at home and be supported to prosper. It must reflect and enable us to become a more cohesive society. And while we put up walls, we shouldn’t put up social barriers. The foundations that we lay must be the bedrock of an inclusive, egalitarian and safe society. The bridges we build must connect us as South Africans. We are all aware that we operate in tough economic conditions. Our collective commitment to hard work and collaboration will help us turn our economy around. Our commitment to the South Africa of our dreams will allow us to fix our weaknesses and achieve national success irrespective of global conditions. Even as we face difficult conditions, it is encouraging to see new projects getting off the ground. Because every crane at work, every part of bricks mixed with mortar, every hard hat worn is a positive indicator that we are a nation on the rise. We hope that all stakeholders will keep working together to ensure that we keep building this better future. The National Development Plan provides a blueprint for the construction of a new nation that will demand and consume the skills and technologies of this sector. We pay tribute to all engineers, town and city planners who are changing our lives daily. You help us rise to new heights. You make our development visible not only to us, but to the millions of international visitors who come to our country. So we hope that the built environment will continue to serve as a metaphor for change because you are continually opening new vistas to all of us. With every storey you build, we can see further across the horizon. We see people in wonderment at how derelict spaces and assets can be turned into new value and utility. So we look to this industry to continue to give us hope and pride; to remain a part of shaping our society and making us ready for an even brighter future. We believe that the South African Forum of Civil Engineering Contractors is indeed ready to better serve our nation, our people and our continent. I thank you.